
"22248","11/1/2004 11:05","04MUMBAI2286","Consulate Mumbai","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04MUMBAI2179|04MUMBAI2189","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MUMBAI 002286 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, IN, Indian Domestic Politics 
SUBJECT: MAHARASHTRA GETS A CHIEF MINISTER - FINALLY 
 
REF: A.  MUMBAI 2179; B.  MUMBAI 2189 
 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
1. (SBU) In a sudden change of course following a long day of 
backroom politicking, Congress selected Vilasrao Deshmukh as the 
new Chief Minister (CM) of Maharashtra late on October 29.  The 
choice was a surprise to most observers in the state who had 
expected outgoing CM Shinde to retain the job.  However, 
Congress dropped Shinde and selected Deshmukh late in the 
evening of the 29th after learning that its coalition partner, 
the NCP, had selected R.R. Patil to fill the deputy Chief 
Minister position allocated to it as part of the Congress/NCP 
power sharing arrangement.  Congress parliamentarians feared 
that Shinde would be too weak to counter the strength of both 
the resurgent NCP and the charismatic Patil.  Deshmukh is 
considered a strong politician who is not afraid of standing up 
to both the NCP and, in particular, its leader Sharad Pawar. 
Pawar had been taking an increasingly aggressive line towards 
Congress following his party\'s strong showing in the Maharashtra 
elections.  The vote marks the return to power of Deshmukh, who 
was CM of Maharashtra from 2001-2003 before resigning amid 
scandals and party disappointment at his performance. 
Biographies of the two new leaders are included at the end of 
this cable.  End summary. 
 
Congress and NCP Elect Leaders 
------------------------------ 
 
2. (SBU) In a surprise vote that followed a day of backroom 
discussions of Congress officials in both Mumbai and Delhi, 
Deshmukh edged out the previous favorite, outgoing CM Shinde. 
The Congress central leadership ultimately chose the candidate 
because it felt it needed a strong and forceful personality to 
stand up to the NCP in the state and to NCP national president 
and Union Agriculture Minister Sharad Pawar in particular. 
Throughout the day Deshmukh had also lobbied heavily on his own 
behalf with both the newly elected Congress members of the state 
parliament and with the Party central leadership. 
 
3. (SBU) The vote marks the return to power of Deshmukh, who was 
CM of Maharashtra from October 2001 to January 2003 as part of 
the Congress-NCP Democratic Front government.   Congress edged 
him out of power due to a series of corruption scandals, 
lackluster performance by the Congress party in the district and 
local elections and the escapades of his eldest son, an aspiring 
actor whose antics became a source of embarrassment for the 
party in the media. 
 
Congress Reacts to News from NCP Camp 
------------------------------------- 
 
4. (SBU) Congress only elected Deshmukh after it received word 
that its coalition partner, the NCP, had chosen R.R. Patil as 
its state parliamentary leader.  In a secret ballot earlier in 
the day, the NCP\'s newly elected representatives to the state 
parliament had selected Patil over two rival candidates.  Patil, 
responsible for the home and rural development portfolios in the 
outgoing Congress/NCP government, is a member of the politically 
dominant and numerically significant Maratha caste in 
Maharashtra.  Upon hearing about his election, Congress 
legislators in Maharashtra prevailed upon emissaries from the 
central leadership in Delhi to approve Deshmukh, as only he was 
seen as charismatic enough to counter R.R. Patil\'s leadership. 
 
Outgoing CM Shinde Long Considered a Shoo-in 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) The press as well as most of our contacts, including 
all interlocutors from the various political parties in the 
state with whom we spoke during the October 28-29 visit of 
SA/INS desk officer James Seevers, expected that Congress needed 
to keep a Dalit caste person in the CM position, at least until 
the next round of state elections early in 2005.  Incumbent 
chief minister Shinde, a Dalit, remained the frontrunner as a 
result, and his election was considered a foregone conclusion as 
soon as it became clear that Congress would keep the CM 
portfolio.  Congress needed a Dalit, so the consensus opinion 
ran, to reward the Dalit vote in the state elections and to 
strengthen its position with Dalit voters in the upcoming state 
elections where Congress fears competition for the BSP party. 
 
6. (SBU) In the end, however, Congress decided that the 
potential weakening of its support in the Maratha caste in the 
state was a greater risk than losing the Dalit vote.  Dashmukh, 
himself a member of the Maratha caste, quickly became a favored 
candidate.  In addition, Congress had begun to feel the pressure 
of a resurgent NCP that had forcefully defended its interests 
after emerging from the state elections with the largest single 
faction in the state parliament.  Pundits say Shinde lost out 
because he was perceived to be totally lacking the killer 
instinct, and too close to NCP leader Pawar.  Dashmukh is not 
only known as a strong leader, but also has a history of 
standing up to Pawar.  Dashmukh is known to relish in \"baiting\" 
the NCP leader, as one local columnist wrote over the weekend. 
 
Two Weeks of Wrangling Weaken Congress, Create Derision 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
7. (SBU) After winning Maharashtra election (ref A), the two 
major alliance partners wrangled for nearly two weeks over the 
composition of the new government.  Although the NCP eventually 
accepted Congress\' claim to the position of Chief Minister, the 
parties could not establish a final consensus over the number of 
deputy CM slots the NCP would get in return for accepting a 
Congress politician in the top jobs.  Media pundits and 
political observers speculated about the reasons for the 
wrangling (ref B).  In the public sphere, Congress began to 
appear as an embattled party fighting to hold onto its turf in 
the face of attacks by the emboldened NCP that had seized the 
political momentum in the state.  The protracted eleven-day 
public spectacle even produced public derision.  As one NCP 
functionary told us Friday, October 29 morning, \"Thank God we 
are electing someone today, before we become complete laughing 
stocks.\" 
 
8. (SBU) Deshmukh and Patil took the oath of office on Monday, 
November 1.  Now that the two leaders are sworn in, the parties 
will begin negotiations over the remaining minister positions 
and portfolios in the new cabinet.  It is expected that about 10 
senior ministers will be named within the next two weeks.  The 
full 44 member cabinet will not likely be named until after the 
winter session of the state parliament. 
 
Bio: Vilasrao Deshmukh 
---------------------- 
 
9. (SBU) Vilasrao Deshmukh (58) is from an elite Maratha family 
from the drought-prone Marathwada region of south-central 
Maharashtra.  At 23, he started his career as his village\'s 
elected headman, progressed to the state legislature in his 
mid-thirties and has been defeated only once (1995) in a 
directly contested election.  In state politics, Deshmukh has 
always been a Pawar detractor.  In various Congress governments 
in the state during the period 1982 to 1995, Deshmukh has 
handled important portfolios like agriculture, revenue, 
cooperation, industries, home, animal husbandry and education at 
various times.  He had led two abortive within-party coups 
against Sharad Pawar, in 1988 and 1990.  In 1996, he tried to 
get elected to the upper house of Maharashtra legislature using 
Shiv Sena support, but was unable to muster the requisite votes 
from his own Congress party.  In the 1999-2004 Congress-NCP 
Democratic Front government of Maharashtra Deshmukh was chief 
minister from October 2001 to January 2003, when he was edged 
out because of corruption scandals, lackluster performance by 
the Congress party in the district and tehsil level elections 
(like County and City elections) and the escapades of his eldest 
son aspiring to be an actor, which were increasingly making 
media headlines. 
 
Bio:  Raosaheb Ramrao Patil 
--------------------------- 
 
10. (SBU) Raosaheb Ramrao Patil is 50.  Born into a very poor 
Maratha family in the Anjani tehsil (administrative unit 
consisting of 100 villages) of sugar-cane-rich Sangli district, 
he completed his college education (an undergraduate degree in 
humanities and a lawyer\'s diploma) in nearby town of Tasgaon, at 
times eating only once a day to save money.  The then 
Maharashtra chief minister Vasantdada Patil spotted R. R. 
Patil\'s leadership potential and brought him into electoral 
politics.  R.R. Patil was elected to the Sangli district council 
in 1979 when he was only 25 years old, very young by the 
standards of Indian electoral politics.  In 1990, 1995, 1999 and 
2004 he was elected to the Maharashtra state legislature. 
During the Shiv Sena/ Bharatiya Janata Party led government from 
1995 to 1999, Patil was one of the most effective opposition 
representatives to use \"call attention motions\" (a parliamentary 
device) to focus attention on corrupt practices of that 
government\'s ministers.  In his home-district, even today he is 
affectionately called \"call attention\" Patil. 
 
11. (SBU) When the first Congress/NCP coalition government took 
oath in October 1999, Patil was given the rural development 
portfolio, which no one else wanted.  He designed a \"village 
cleanliness campaign\", in which all of the state\'s 36,000 odd 
villages could participate, each village defining what 
cleanliness meant for its inhabitants.  The transparent judging 
process yielded amazing results.  Some villages built drainage 
systems, some houses for the homeless and some schools, and some 
even designed websites, using their own labor and government 
allotted village level funds.  The World Bank concluded in 2002 
that the scheme generated about 2.1 million dollars of rural 
asset creation in its first two years of operation.  Two other 
neighboring states Madhya Pradesh and Rajsthan emulated the 
scheme. 
 
12. (SBU) In December 2002, NCP nationalist president Sharad 
Pawar appointed R. R. Patil the state unit president of the 
party and in December 2003, Patil was also given the state home 
portfolio (the police force comes under this), when the Mumbai 
police was rocked by a tax-evasion scandal known as the Telgi 
scam implicating highest level of officials, possibly the home 
minister himself.  The NCP\'s then deputy chief minister and home 
minister Chhagan Bhujbal had to resign over this scandal.   In 
the new administration too, R.R. Patil is expected to handle the 
home and rural development portfolios.  However, he might lose 
the state party president post to Bhujbal.  R.R. Patil\'s 
daughters still study in the no-fees government school in his 
village and his parents still work the family farm.  He reads 
late into the night and is never seen on the party circuit.  In 
April-June 2004, he made ingenious use of some alleged 
references to 17th century iconic Maratha king Shivaji in 
American Scholar James Laine\'s book (and ex-Prime Minister Atal 
Bihari Vajpayee\'s inferred defense of it) to polarize Maratha 
caste votes for his party.  Due to some unfortunate experiences 
in his undergraduate days at the hands of his Brahmin teachers, 
he is rumored to be strongly anti-Brahmin.  He is also rumored 
to be not very comfortable speaking English. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
13. (SBU) The Maharashtra Congress party has been shaken to the 
core by the strong showing by an assertive NCP in the recent 
state elections.  A junior partner in the previous coalition 
(Congress 73, NCP 56) NCP emerged as the senior partner with 71 
legislators against Congress 69 this time round.   The last 
minute choice of the charismatic and combative Deshmukh over the 
\"nice guy\" Shinde shows the extent of Congress\' concern about 
the strength of its coalition partner.   Each party\'s choice of 
a strong, charismatic personality as their leaders in the state 
is also a signal that their relationship will likely be rocky 
and perhaps even acrimonious when they begin to address the 
problems facing the state. 
 
SIGNATURE 
"
"22410","11/3/2004 9:05","04MUMBAI2316","Consulate Mumbai","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04MUMBAI2189","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MUMBAI 002316 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
(CORRECTED COPY) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, IN, Indian Domestic Politics 
SUBJECT: MAHARASHTRA GETS A CHIEF MINISTER - FINALLY 
 
REF: A)  MUMBAI 2179; B)  MUMBAI 2189 
 
Summary: 
-------------- 
1. (SBU) In a sudden change of course following a long day of 
backroom politicking, Congress selected Vilasrao Deshmukh as the 
new Chief Minister (CM) of Maharashtra late on October 29.  The 
choice was a surprise to most observers in the state who had 
expected outgoing CM Shinde to retain the job.  However, 
Congress dropped Shinde and selected Deshmukh late in the 
evening of the 29th after learning that its coalition partner, 
the NCP, had selected R.R. Patil to fill the deputy Chief 
Minister position allocated to it as part of the Congress/NCP 
power sharing arrangement.  Congress parliamentarians feared 
that Shinde would be too weak to counter the strength of both 
the resurgent NCP and the charismatic Patil.  Deshmukh is 
considered a strong politician who is not afraid of standing up 
to both the NCP and, in particular, its leader Sharad Pawar. 
Pawar had been taking an increasingly aggressive line towards 
Congress following his party\'s strong showing in the Maharashtra 
elections.  The vote marks the return to power of Deshmukh, who 
was CM of Maharashtra from 2001-2003 before resigning amid 
scandals and party disappointment at his performance. 
Biographies of the two new leaders are included at the end of 
this cable.  End summary. 
 
Congress and NCP Elect Leaders 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
2. (SBU) In a surprise vote that followed a day of backroom 
discussions of Congress officials in both Mumbai and Delhi, 
Deshmukh edged out the previous favorite, outgoing CM Shinde. 
The Congress central leadership ultimately chose the candidate 
because it felt it needed a strong and forceful personality to 
stand up to the NCP in the state and to NCP national president 
and Union Agriculture Minister Sharad Pawar in particular. 
Throughout the day Deshmukh had also lobbied heavily on his own 
behalf with both the newly elected Congress members of the state 
parliament and with the Party central leadership. 
 
3. (SBU) The vote marks the return to power of Deshmukh, who was 
CM of Maharashtra from October 2001 to January 2003 as part of 
the Congress-NCP Democratic Front government.   Congress edged 
him out of power due to a series of corruption scandals, 
lackluster performance by the Congress party in the district and 
local elections and the escapades of his eldest son, an aspiring 
actor whose antics became a source of embarrassment for the 
party in the media. 
 
Congress Reacts to News from NCP Camp 
--------------------------------------------- -------------------- 
 
4. (SBU) Congress only elected Deshmukh after it received word 
that its coalition partner, the NCP, had chosen R.R. Patil as 
its state parliamentary leader.  In a secret ballot earlier in 
the day, the NCP\'s newly elected representatives to the state 
parliament had selected Patil over two rival candidates.  Patil, 
responsible for the home and rural development portfolios in the 
outgoing Congress/NCP government, is a member of the politically 
dominant and numerically significant Maratha caste in 
Maharashtra.  Upon hearing about his election, Congress 
legislators in Maharashtra prevailed upon emissaries from the 
central leadership in Delhi to approve Deshmukh, as only he was 
seen as charismatic enough to counter R.R. Patil\'s leadership. 
 
Outgoing CM Shinde Long Considered a Shoo-in 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
-------------- 
 
5. (SBU) The press as well as most of our contacts, including 
all interlocutors from the various political parties in the 
state with whom we spoke during the October 28-29 visit of 
SA/INS desk officer James Seevers, expected that Congress needed 
to keep a Dalit caste person in the CM position, at least until 
the next round of state elections early in 2005.  Incumbent 
chief minister Shinde, a Dalit, remained the frontrunner as a 
result, and his election was considered a foregone conclusion as 
soon as it became clear that Congress would keep the CM 
portfolio.  Congress needed a Dalit, so the consensus opinion 
ran, to reward the Dalit vote in the state elections and to 
strengthen its position with Dalit voters in the upcoming state 
elections where Congress fears competition for the BSP party. 
 
6. (SBU) In the end, however, Congress decided that the 
potential weakening of its support in the Maratha caste in the 
state was a greater risk than losing the Dalit vote.  Dashmukh, 
himself a member of the Maratha caste, quickly became a favored 
candidate.  In addition, Congress had begun to feel the pressure 
of a resurgent NCP that had forcefully defended its interests 
after emerging from the state elections with the largest single 
faction in the state parliament.  Pundits say Shinde lost out 
because he was perceived to be totally lacking the killer 
instinct, and too close to NCP leader Pawar.  Dashmukh is not 
only known as a strong leader, but also has a history of 
standing up to Pawar.  Dashmukh is known to relish in \"baiting\" 
the NCP leader, as one local columnist wrote over the weekend. 
 
Two Weeks of Wrangling Weaken Congress, Create Derision 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
---------------------------------- 
 
7. (SBU) After winning Maharashtra election (ref A), the two 
major alliance partners wrangled for nearly two weeks over the 
composition of the new government.  Although the NCP eventually 
accepted Congress\' claim to the position of Chief Minister, the 
parties could not establish a final consensus over the number of 
deputy CM slots the NCP would get in return for accepting a 
Congress politician in the top jobs.  Media pundits and 
political observers speculated about the reasons for the 
wrangling (ref B).  In the public sphere, Congress began to 
appear as an embattled party fighting to hold onto its turf in 
the face of attacks by the emboldened NCP that had seized the 
political momentum in the state.  The protracted eleven-day 
public spectacle even produced public derision.  As one NCP 
functionary told us Friday, October 29 morning, \"Thank God we 
are electing someone today, before we become complete laughing 
stocks.\" 
 
8. (SBU) Deshmukh and Patil took the oath of office on Monday, 
November 1.  Now that the two leaders are sworn in, the parties 
will begin negotiations over the remaining minister positions 
and portfolios in the new cabinet.  It is expected that about 10 
senior ministers will be named within the next two weeks.  The 
full 44 member cabinet will not likely be named until after the 
winter session of the state parliament. 
 
Bio: Vilasrao Deshmukh 
---------------------------------------- 
 
9. (SBU) Vilasrao Deshmukh (58) is from an elite Maratha family 
from the drought-prone Marathwada region of south-central 
Maharashtra.  At 23, he started his career as his village\'s 
elected headman, progressed to the state legislature in his 
mid-thirties and has been defeated only once (1995) in a 
directly contested election.  In state politics, Deshmukh has 
always been a Pawar detractor.  In various Congress governments 
in the state during the period 1982 to 1995, Deshmukh has 
handled important portfolios like agriculture, revenue, 
cooperation, industries, home, animal husbandry and education at 
various times.  He had led two abortive within-party coups 
against Sharad Pawar, in 1988 and 1990.  In 1996, he tried to 
get elected to the upper house of Maharashtra legislature using 
Shiv Sena support, but was unable to muster the requisite votes 
from his own Congress party.  In the 1999-2004 Congress-NCP 
Democratic Front government of Maharashtra Deshmukh was chief 
minister from October 2001 to January 2003, when he was edged 
out because of corruption scandals, lackluster performance by 
the Congress party in the district and tehsil level elections 
(like County and City elections) and the escapades of his eldest 
son aspiring to be an actor, which were increasingly making 
media headlines. 
 
Bio:  Raosaheb Ramrao Patil 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
10. (SBU) Raosaheb Ramrao Patil is 50.  Born into a very poor 
Maratha family in the Anjani tehsil (administrative unit 
consisting of 100 villages) of sugar-cane-rich Sangli district, 
he completed his college education (an undergraduate degree in 
humanities and a lawyer\'s diploma) in nearby town of Tasgaon, at 
times eating only once a day to save money.  The then 
Maharashtra chief minister Vasantdada Patil spotted R. R. 
Patil\'s leadership potential and brought him into electoral 
politics.  R.R. Patil was elected to the Sangli district council 
in 1979 when he was only 25 years old, very young by the 
standards of Indian electoral politics.  In 1990, 1995, 1999 and 
2004 he was elected to the Maharashtra state legislature. 
During the Shiv Sena/ Bharatiya Janata Party led government from 
1995 to 1999, Patil was one of the most effective opposition 
representatives to use \"call attention motions\" (a parliamentary 
device) to focus attention on corrupt practices of that 
government\'s ministers.  In his home-district, even today he is 
affectionately called \"call attention\" Patil. 
11. (SBU) When the first Congress/NCP coalition government took 
oath in October 1999, Patil was given the rural development 
portfolio, which no one else wanted.  He designed a \"village 
 
cleanliness campaign\", in which all of the state\'s 36,000 odd 
villages could participate, each village defining what 
cleanliness meant for its inhabitants.  The transparent judging 
process yielded amazing results.  Some villages built drainage 
systems, some houses for the homeless and some schools, and some 
even designed websites, using their own labor and government 
allotted village level funds.  The World Bank concluded in 2002 
that the scheme generated about 2.1 million dollars of rural 
asset creation in its first two years of operation.  Two other 
neighboring states Madhya Pradesh and Rajsthan emulated the 
scheme. 
 
12. (SBU) In December 2002, NCP nationalist president Sharad 
Pawar appointed R. R. Patil the state unit president of the 
party and in December 2003, Patil was also given the state home 
portfolio (the police force comes under this), when the Mumbai 
police was rocked by a tax-evasion scandal known as the Telgi 
scam implicating highest level of officials, possibly the home 
minister himself.  The NCP\'s then deputy chief minister and home 
minister Chhagan Bhujbal had to resign over this scandal.   In 
the new administration too, R.R. Patil is expected to handle the 
home and rural development portfolios.  However, he might lose 
the state party president post to Bhujbal.  R.R. Patil\'s 
daughters still study in the no-fees government school in his 
village and his parents still work the family farm.  He reads 
late into the night and is never seen on the party circuit.  In 
April-June 2004, he made ingenious use of some alleged 
references to 17th century iconic Maratha king Shivaji in 
American Scholar James Laine\'s book (and ex-Prime Minister Atal 
Bihari Vajpayee\'s inferred defense of it) to polarize Maratha 
caste votes for his party.  Due to some unfortunate experiences 
in his undergraduate days at the hands of his Brahmin teachers, 
he is rumored to be strongly anti-Brahmin.  He is also rumored 
to be not very comfortable speaking English. 
 
Comment 
------------------- 
 
13. (SBU) The Maharashtra Congress party has been shaken to the 
core by the strong showing by an assertive NCP in the recent 
state elections.  A junior partner in the previous coalition 
(Congress 73, NCP 56) NCP emerged as the senior partner with 71 
legislators against Congress 69 this time round.   The last 
minute choice of the charismatic and combative Deshmukh over the 
\"nice guy\" Shinde shows the extent of Congress\' concern about 
the strength of its coalition partner.   Each party\'s choice of 
a strong, charismatic personality as their leaders in the state 
is also a signal that their relationship will likely be rocky 
and perhaps even acrimonious when they begin to address the 
problems facing the state. 
 
 
SIMMONS 
"
"22512","11/5/2004 10:34","04MUMBAI2344","Consulate Mumbai","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03MUMBAI1033|03MUMBAI1486|03MUMBAI828|04NEWDELHI2185","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MUMBAI 002344 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PREL, IN, Indian Domestic Politics 
SUBJECT: BEST BAKERY STAR WITNESS CHANGES TESTIMONY...AGAIN 
 
REF: A. 03 MUMBAI 828; B. 03 MUMBAI 1033; C. 03 MUMBAI 1486; D. 04 MUMB 
 1826; E. NEW DELHI 2185 
 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  On November 4, 2004, star eyewitness Zaheera 
Shaikh of the emblematic/symbolic Best Bakery case from the 
March-May 2002 violence in Gujarat, refused to testify in the 
Mumbai special court.   A day earlier she had appeared with her 
brother, another key witness, at a press conference in the 
siblings\' home town in Gujarat hurling accusations at an NGO and 
a well-known human rights activist that had been supporting her 
case.  In April 2004, the Indian Supreme Court ordered that the 
Best Bakery case be retried in Maharashtra, because of appeals 
made by Zaheera, the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC), 
and the voluntary organization Citizens for Justice and Peace 
(CJP) that the victims were terrified of testifying in any court 
in Gujarat.  According to some of the political and human rights 
contacts we spoke to, Zaheera\'s repeated recantations of what 
occurred in 2002 (she has already given three contradicting 
accounts of the incident) will be a major setback to the justice 
process in Gujarat; however, editorial opinion argues that the 
other riot cases will continue unaffected by the recent turn of 
events (reftels).  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) On November 3, 2004 Zaheera Shaikh  appeared at a press 
conference in her home town of  Vadodara, Gujarat, and made 
accusations against Mumbai-based human rights activist Teesta 
Setalvad and CJP that she was \"[coerced] to name political 
figures\" and was \"being held against her will.\"  Both have 
championed   Shaikh\'s  cause since July 2003.  She also stated 
that four of the accused were not involved in the bakery arson. 
She claimed that Setalvad coached her into naming them in her 
affidavit to the Indian Supreme Court.  Gujarat chief minister 
Narendra Modi of the BJP immediately told the media that the 
role of certain NGOs who are unduly trying to influence the 
judicial process should be examined.  As the news of Zaheera\'s 
press conference reached Mumbai, defense counsel Adhik Shirodkar 
proclaimed, \"this lends credence to our claim that she was being 
coached all along to name my clients, who were not even in 
Vadodara on the day of the arson.\" 
 
3. (U) Also on November 3, 2004, the Government of Maharashtra 
(GOM) prosecutorial officers requested the court to declare 
Zaheera\'s brother Nafitullah an \"absent witness.\"  The court was 
informed that he disappeared on October 25, 2004 in spite of 
being under police protection.  Instead of court, Nafitullah 
appeared with Zaheera at her Vadodara press conference.  Zaheera 
also risks being declared absent as she did not appear in court 
on November 4, 2005.  The GOM is reporting that they believe 
that their case is not weakened as the case against the rioters 
is not solely dependent upon Zaheera\'s testimony and other 
witnesses have already testified. 
 
What is driving Zaheera? 
------------------------ 
 
4. (U)  In media interviews, Teesta Setalvad categorically 
denied the allegations. She further suggested that Zaheera and 
her brother have been \"got at\" - either threatened with 
retaliation or bribed - to change their testimony.  Setalvad did 
not say who might have threatened or bribe the witnesses.  Some 
media are suggesting that the root cause of the change in 
testimony is because Zaheera was attempting to extort a more 
comfortable life in Mumbai from CJP (who Zaheera believed had 
received large amounts of cash due to her case).  When CJP did 
not meet Zaheera\'s demands, Zaheera recanted. 
 
5. (SBU) Our media contacts have told us that they themselves 
suspected something was amiss in the Setalvad-Zaheera 
relationship for the past three months.  Setalvad refused to 
tell anyone where Zaheera was located, which could be due to 
witness safety considerations; however, our contacts reported 
that Setalvad even denied cell-phone interviews.  Another NGO 
activist from Ahmedabad said, \"What we are calling Setalvad\'s 
over-protectiveness, Zaheera is calling \'being held against her 
wishes.\'  How can we blame her?\" 
 
6. (SBU) A senior lawyer practicing in the Gujarat high court 
told us, \"Even in case of her initial statement in Gujarat court 
in May 2003 which caused the accused to be let off, my 
information is that she was promised money by the accused, but 
did not get it.  So she held a media conference in July 2003 
saying she lied in court.  If the NGO says she is lying for 
money now in October 2004, the accused are going to turn around 
and say that she was lying for money in July 2003.\" 
 
 
Implications for Gujarat Justice Process 
---------------------------------------- 
 
7.  (U) The human rights community is divided about the 
implications of the latest theatrical developments in Zaheera\'s 
case for the justice process in Gujarat.  By the end of the 
violence in May 2002, Gujarat police registered more than 4000 
cases, but only 2000 were taken to court.  The other cases were 
summarily closed with officials stating that while a crime had 
been committed, the identity of the perpetrators could not be 
ascertained.  In June 2004, the Indian Supreme Court directed 
the Gujarat police to appoint a high-level committee to go into 
each of the summarily closed cases.  That process is underway. 
 
8. (U) Out of the remaining 2000 cases, the Indian Supreme Court 
has stayed trials in ten major arson cases (including the Godhra 
train burning that set off the violence), while the other 2000 
odd cases are winding their way through the Gujarat lower 
courts.  After the Indian Supreme Court put Zaheera\'s case under 
the microscope in July 2003, Gujarat lower courts have handed 
out punishments to perpetrators in some 200 cases (the accused 
could still be exonerated on appeal to the Gujarat High Court.) 
Alluding to this, some media editorial pages have strongly 
suggested that Zaheera\'s recantation wouldn\'t derail the process 
already set in motion.  Correspondents from some of the very 
same media outlets, however, reported that human rights 
community in Gujarat is discouraged while those awaiting trial 
are hopeful that they too will have their cases called into 
question. 
 
9. (SBU) A Mumbai-based human rights activist told us, \"the real 
tragedy of this drama is that the retrial will lose importance 
in the mind of the media compared to Zaheera\'s antics.  Not only 
that, in other trials too, people will suspect that the victims 
are trying to cash in just like Zaheera. I think it is a serious 
setback.\"  Another said, \"Teesta Setalvad was following a risky 
strategy of basing too much on a single testimony.  At least the 
GOM prosecutors have been thorough in securing testimony of 
other witnesses.  So the case still might reach a reasonable 
verdict.\" 
 
10. (SBU) Ahmedabad-based human rights activist Father Prakash 
(who is closely associated with Setalvad) said, \"The court is 
not foolish.  It understands that this girl has given three 
different versions already.  Other witnesses have testified. 
Neither this retrial, nor others in Gujarat are going to suffer 
in any way.  The justice process is firmly underway.\" 
 
Comment: 
------- 
11. (SBU)  Zaheera\'s dilemma highlights the internal 
contradiction in the justice process after incidents of mass 
violence in India.  The poor or not so poor victims may be 
bought over easily because they want to pick up the pieces of 
their lives and move on, while the champions of justice -- whose 
lives were in no way affected by the violence - hope the victims 
stick to their testimony.  It is too early to state whether or 
not the justice system, which seemed to be exercising its 
independence by removing the case from Gujarat, will be 
dramatically impacted by these events.  Zaheera\'s changing 
testimony does, however, highlight basic problems of the entire 
system.  Whatever the true reason for Zaheera\'s change in 
testimony, the fact that the media and our contacts seem to feel 
that all explanations are equally viable (being threatened, 
being bribed, or actively trying to sell testimony) indicate 
that basic safeguards to protect the witnesses are still weak in 
these highly charged cases. 
 
 
SIGNATURE 
"
"22669","11/9/2004 12:10","04MUMBAI2369","Consulate Mumbai","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04MUMBAI2286","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS MUMBAI 002369 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, IN, Indian Domestic Politics 
SUBJECT: MAHARASHTRA MINISTERS TAKE OATH OF OFFICE; YET TO GET 
PORTFOLIOS 
 
REF: MUMBAI 2286 
 
 
1. (SBU) On November 9, 2004 Governor Mohammed Fazal 
administered the oath of office and confidentiality to 15 senior 
ministers chosen to be part of the Congress/Nationalist Congress 
Party (NCP) led Democratic Front government of Maharashtra.  The 
new ministers have yet to receive portfolios.  Chief Minister 
(CM) Vilasrao Deshmukh of the Congress Party and Deputy Chief 
Minister (DCM) R.R. Patil of the NCP told the media that 
portfolios would be allocated within the next two weeks. 
 
2. (SBU) Last week, NCP legislator Babasaheb Kupekar was elected 
speaker of the state parliament.  He ran unopposed.   The 
opposition coalition of Shiv Sena and the Bharatiya Janata Party 
(BJP) Narayan Rane of the Shiv Sena, who had been chief minister 
of Maharashtra from 1997-1999, as leader of the opposition. 
Rane had been opposition leader in the outgoing parliament. 
 
3. (SBU) Further ministers are expected to be named in the 
coming weeks.  Competition for cabinet positions was 
particularly fierce in the wake of a January 2004 law that 
limits the number of cabinet positions to 15 percent of the 
number of deputies in a state parliament.  As a result, the new 
government is allowed a maximum of 43 ministerial portfolios as 
opposed to 67 in the outgoing state government.  The NCP is 
expected to get 24 portfolios and Congress 19 as a result of the 
two parties\' coalition agreement.  The jobs of CM and DCM both 
count against this total, so Congress and NCP will be allocated 
18 and 23 portfolios respectively.  It is expected that the 
ministers sworn in on November 9 will receive the most powerful 
and influential ministries.  Most of the remaining cabinet jobs 
will go to ministers of state and junior ministers. 
 
4. (SBU) The swearing-in ceremony followed intense negotiations 
between Congress and NCP for the reduced number of minister 
portfolios.  Of the 15 ministers sworn in on November 9, six are 
members of Congress and nine are NCP members.  Congress is set 
to lose the larger number of minister posts.  Over the last week 
the new CM , Vilasrao Deshmukh made four trips to New Delhi to 
discuss the cabinet formation with his party\'s high command. 
Several portfolios will also have to be allocated to members of 
the smaller parties and to independents who are members of the 
coalition.  Each party also had to deal with dissatisfied 
members of their own ranks who were ministers in the previous 
government but will find themselves without a portfolio in the 
new, smaller government.  Congress and NCP are therefore 
expected to address the issue of additional ministers gradually 
and on a case-by-case basis in the coming weeks. 
 
5. (SBU) Of the Congress ministers taking oath, the most 
prominent were former Industries Minister Patangrao Kadam, 
former Forests and Environment Minister Surupsinh Naik and 
former labor minister Satish Chaturvedi.  Prominent among 9 NCP 
ministers sworn in are the two former deputy chief ministers 
Vijay Sinh Mohite Patil and Chhagan Bhujbal, former finance 
minister Jayant Patil and former irrigation minister Ajit Pawar, 
nephew of Union Agriculture Minister Sharad Pawar.   The new 
ministers will not necessarily inherit the portfolios they held 
in the outgoing government.  Naik\'s portfolio, for example, is 
expected to go to NCP in the new government. 
 
 
SIMMONS 
"
"23362","11/29/2004 10:05","04MUMBAI2478","Consulate Mumbai","CONFIDENTIAL","04NewDelhi7348","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L MUMBAI 002478 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR SA/INS, NEA/IPA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL:  11/29/14 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, TSPA, PTER, IS, IN, GOI, India-Israel 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL REOPENS CONSULATE IN MUMBAI 
 
REF: New Delhi 7348 
 
1. (C) On November 15 visiting Israeli MFA officials briefed 
Acting PO and Pol/Econ Chief on Israel\'s decision to reopen its 
consulate in Mumbai.  Israel closed its consulate in Mumbai in 
mid-2003 as part of cost-cutting measures that affected Israeli 
diplomatic posts around the world, Israeli MFA official Amos 
Nadai told ConGen officers. 
 
2. (C) Nadai, deputy director general for Asia/Pacific in the 
Israeli MFA, said the Israeli government now realized that the 
closure of the Mumbai consulate was a \"mistake.\"  Israel was 
interested in deepening its relationship with India, and closing 
the consulate had sent the wrong signal to the Indian 
government.  Nadai added, however, that the GOI had not put any 
pressure on Israel to reopen the consulate, but was welcoming 
the decision.  The consulate\'s main job would be to promote 
bilateral trade:  India had become an important destination for 
Israeli arms exports, and commercial, non-military ties were 
also growing.  Bilateral commercial trade with India, which 
amounted to around $1.5 billion in 2003, was expected to top $2 
billion this year. 
 
3. (SBU) Mordehai Amihai, Director of the South and SE Asia 
department of the MFA, and Barukh Binah, head of the bureau of 
international affairs in the MFA\'s center for political 
research, accompanied Nadai to Mumbai.  They stopped in the city 
while en route to New Delhi for bilateral talks with the GOI 
(reftel).  Amihai told us Israel had identified India as one of 
three countries where the growth in commercial ties was most 
promising. (Russia and China are the others.)  In a November 22 
discussion with Pol/Econ chief, Daniel Sivan, the consulate\'s 
new DPO, confirmed that Vice Prime Minister Ehud Olmert will 
lead a delegation of about 100 Israeli business reps on a trade 
mission to India in early December.  Olmert will visit New 
Delhi, Mumbai and Bangalore, Sivan said, echoing reports in the 
Israeli press over the weekend. 
 
4. (C) Nadai said a new consul general will most probably be 
named within the next several weeks and that, judging from the 
shortlist of candidates he\'d seen, will likely be someone 
without prior diplomatic experience in India.  The CG and Sivan 
will man the consulate along with an Israeli security detachment 
and a small local staff, Sivan said.  The Israeli government 
never terminated the lease on its facility, which occupies an 
upper-level floor in a high-rise in southern Mumbai\'s financial 
district, and was hence able to re-open the consulate quickly. 
Nadai queried A/PO about security and general safety in Mumbai. 
Sivan, who told Pol/Econ chief that he worked as a finance 
officer at the MFA in Jerusalem, arrived in Mumbai this past 
summer.  The consulate was already issuing visas and providing 
services to Israeli businessmen and tourists in Mumbai, Sivan 
said.  According to press reports, the consulate is already 
receiving about 400 visa applications monthly. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
5. (C) Several years ago, some Muslim observers publicly 
criticized the initial opening of the Israeli consulate in 
Mumbai.  They asked whether an increased official Israeli 
presence in India was consistent with the GOI\'s criticism of 
Israeli policy towards the Palestinians.  This time around the 
Urdu language press, like the rest of the India media, did 
report briefly about the re-opening of the Israeli consulate. 
However, public criticism from Muslim quarters has been absent, 
which may be an indication of the increased normalcy surrounding 
Indian/Israeli relations.  That said, we observe that Mumbai 
Muslims remain disturbed and concerned about the 
Israeli/Palestinian conflict. 
 
SIMMONS 
"
"25222","1/11/2005 13:24","05MUMBAI124","Consulate Mumbai","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MUMBAI 000124 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, IN, GOI 
SUBJECT: INDIA TO EXTEND DUAL CITIZENSHIP TO MOST FORMER CITIZENS 
 
 
1. (U) In a January 7 speech in Mumbai, Prime Minister Manmohan 
Singh said the GOI would extend Indian citizenship to all 
Indians who left the country after 1950 and had been naturalized 
in another country.  Until recently, Indians lost their 
citizenship if they were naturalized elsewhere.  Singh made the 
announcement during his keynote speech to the third Pravasi 
Bharatiya Divas, an annual gathering of expatriate Indians 
organized by the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry (FICCI). About 1,500 visitors of Indian origin attended 
the conference, including several hundred from the United 
States. 
 
Previous Law Granted Dual Citizenship to Only 16 Countries 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
2. (U) The Indian Parliament passed a law in 2004 that promised 
citizenship to Indian emigrants who had been naturalized in any 
of 16 countries, including the U.S. Implementation of the law 
had been slow and bureaucratic, however.  The first candidate 
was naturalized in November, 2004.  Many eligible candidates had 
complained of the bureaucratic hurdles in the process, while 
others who are now citizens of countries not covered by the law 
had complained at being left out. 
 
Most Pakistan, Bangladesh Citizens Will Not Benefit 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
3. (U) Singh said he had now ordered the pertinent GOI 
ministries to prepare, in a timely fashion, a policy for 
extending citizenship to all Indians who emigrated after January 
26, 1950, regardless of their current citizenship, thereby 
broadening the impact of the Parliamentary resolution.  The 
cut-off date was the day that the Republic of India was formally 
established.  By restricting eligibility to emigrants who left 
India after this date, most citizens of Pakistan and Bangladesh 
born in what is now India but who fled in the first turbulent 
years following partition will be excluded. 
 
Previous Citizenship Law\'s Restrictions 
--------------------------------------- 
 
4. (U) It is unclear whether several restrictions of the 2004 
law would be carried over into any new rules that the GOI 
intends to promulgate.  The 2004 law, while granting 
citizenship, did not convey voting rights to re-naturalized 
citizens, nor did it allow them to run for political office or 
be employed in defense services.  Singh made no mention of these 
provisions in his speech.  He only said that India will restrict 
dual citizenship to citizens of those countries where it is 
already permitted.  The Indian government estimates that about 
25 million persons born in India are now living in 110 countries 
around the globe.  The number of U.S. citizens with Indian 
origins has been estimated at about 2 million. 
 
Initial Reactions 
----------------- 
 
5. (U) Initial reactions to Singh\'s announcement were positive. 
Visa issues were the first to be mentioned in the media.  Most 
commentators noted that the rules would make it easier for many 
Indians living abroad to travel to India. (Note: Currently 
former Indian citizens, like other foreigners, need visas to 
travel to India.  Applying for a visa can be a time-consuming 
and frustrating experience at Indian embassies and consulates 
abroad.  End note.) Dual citizenship will broaden the pool of 
potential investors in the select number of industries where 
foreign engagement is still limited.  Dual citizens should also 
benefit from provisions that prevent foreigners from purchasing 
property and engaging in real estate development.  Several AmCit 
businessmen of Indian origin who were present at the conference 
told PolEconChief that they wanted more clarity before deciding 
to apply for citizenship. One businessman said he wanted to know 
the tax implications of the new rules. 
 
Dual Citizenship and India\'s Modernization Efforts 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
6. (U) Singh made it clear that the GOI hopes that newly 
re-naturalized citizens would use the benefits of dual 
citizenship to invest in India.  He explicitly mentioned his aim 
of attracting $150 billion in foreign investment over the next 
ten years for infrastructure projects, and said that Indians 
residing abroad could contribute to that goal.  He said he also 
hoped that the new citizens would bring know-how and experience 
gathered abroad back to the land of their birth.  He encouraged 
his listeners to invest in schools or hospitals in their home 
cities or villages.  He tried to show that his government 
intended to treat non-resident Indians and former citizens 
differently than Indian governments in the past had done. He 
said he was \"painfully aware\" that promises to provide dual 
citizenship were not being implemented properly.  He said he 
understood the impatience that many non-resident Indians had 
with the GOI, and he acknowledged that all Indian governments, 
including his own, had taken far too much time to address the 
concerns of Indians living abroad.  He said the application 
process would be simplified and made more transparent. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7. (U) The Manmohan Singh announcement reflects the rapidly 
evolving Indian view of its ethnic diaspora, which in turn 
reflects New Delhi\'s growing level of comfort with India\'s 
international connections.  In the past, Indian emigrants had 
often been treated with a mixture of scorn and envy by various 
Indian governments and by Indian society at large.  The Prime 
Minister\'s message was that India needs to welcome its former 
citizens and utilize their talents and resources as the country 
modernizes.  It remains to be seen whether policy changes will 
come as quickly as Singh indicated.  All conference participants 
we spoke with applauded Singh\'s initiative, but some, citing 
their own experience of dealing with the Indian bureaucracy in 
business matters, were skeptical that rules could be implemented 
as quickly as the Prime Minister had indicated.  In any case 
dual citizenship, once properly enacted, will no doubt have the 
medium- to long-term effect that Singh desires. 
 
8. (U) Embassy New Delhi cleared this cable. 
 
SIMMONS 
"