
"13017","1/2/2004 18:09","04PARAMARIBO1","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","04PARAMARIBO520","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  PARAMARIBO 000001 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR MSEIBEL, FOR EB, AND FOR EPSC: SENRIQUEZ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV, ETRD, ECON, EFIN, NS 
SUBJECT: SURINAME INTRODUCES SURINAME DOLLAR TO BOLSTER 
CONFIDENCE IN CURRENCY BUT WILL IT WORK? 
 
REF: PARAMARIBO 520 
 
1. Summary: On January 1, 2004, Suriname will launch its new 
currency, the Surinamese dollar.  The new currency will be 
set at an exchange rate of SR$ 2.80 to one USD, versus Sf 
2,800 to one USD.  According to Central Bank President Andre 
Telting, the introduction of the new currency is meant to 
bolster public confidence in the local currency The GOS has 
enacted a number of measures to curb government spending and 
reduce liquidity, which Telting believes will stabilize the 
exchange rate while at the same time reduce inflation and 
local interest rates.  Still, real economic stability will 
only come when the GOS enacts a program to encourage private 
sector expansion.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------------------- 
GOS Introduces the Suriname Dollar 
---------------------------------- 
 
2. On January 1, 2004, Suriname will launch its new 
currency, the Surinamese dollar (SR$), removing 3 zeros from 
the exchange rate.  In a lunch hosted by the Paramaribo 
Diplomatic League (PDL) attended by diplomats and 
representatives of NGOs, Central Bank President Andre 
Telting discussed the launch of the new currency and 
answered questions.  Telting told the gathering that the 
introduction of the new currency was meant to bolster the 
Surinamese public\'s confidence in the local currency which 
had eroded due to 20 years of overspending by the GOS.  The 
Surinamese guilder (Sf) had devalued from Sf 200 to one USD 
in 1990 to a high of Sf 3,600 to one USD in 2002.  Telting 
told the assembled representatives that the GOS had chosen 
to rename the guilder the dollar so that Suriname\'s currency 
would be more recognizable in the region -- like Guyanese, 
Trinidad and Tobago, and Jamaican dollars. 
 
3. As of January 1, 2004, all amounts set in Surinamese 
guilders will be converted to Surinamese dollars and divided 
by 1,000 so that the SR$ will sell at an exchange rate of 
SR$ 2.8 to one USD, versus the current rate of Sf 2,800 to 
one USD.  To ease the transition for consumers, shopkeepers 
will be required to list prices both in the old currency and 
in the new currency for a period of three months.  Old notes 
can be converted to new notes for a period of up to 6 months 
at commercial banks, after which exchanges will only be 
accepted at the Central Bank (CBvS.) These can take place 
for up to 30 years after an investigation into the origin of 
the notes, in accordance with recently introduced anti-money 
laundering legislation.  The new law provides for all 
existing contracts written in guilders to be payable in 
Surinamese dollars and allows contracts and local prices to 
be set in and payable in either the local currency or a 
foreign currency such as the Euro or the US dollar. 
 
4. The new bank notes will be in denominations of $1, $2.50, 
$5, $10, $20, $50, and $100.  Coins, which have not been 
used in a decade due to hyperinflation in the 1980s and 
1990s, will be accepted back into circulation since the 
coins are already in cents.  The coins are available in 
denominations of 1, 5, 10, 25, 100, and 250 cents.  Those 
coins will retain their nominal value, in what Telting 
called a sort of social dividend for elderly Surinamers who 
may still hold them and who suffered the most from 
Suriname\'s 20 years of hyperinflation which ravaged life 
savings and rendered pensions worthless.  Telting estimated 
that the cost of minting new coins would exceed the cost of 
reusing the old coins.  New sets have been ordered, he said, 
but only on a small scale.  Telting estimated that the SR$ 1 
million in coins still in circulation would not be a 
disturbance to the money supply because the government would 
not have to pay hard currency to mint new coins, reducing 
the cost of recirculating the coins. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Government Overspending = Hyperinflation 
---------------------------------------- 
 
5. Telting explained that in the 1980s and 90s, gross 
overspending by the government led to massive devaluation of 
the Surinamese guilder.  Telting explained that the CBvS 
correlated the change in Suriname\'s exchange rate to the 
rate of inflation and that by stabilizing the exchange rate, 
 
 
the GOS would stabilize inflation.  Suriname, Telting 
continued, is a \"small open economy\" (i.e., that Suriname 
imports much of its manufactured and commercial goods and, 
therefore, is subject to the vagaries of the world economy) 
with a strong import component.  In 2001, the GOS was able 
to stabilize the exchange rate by reducing government 
spending, but following the 2002 civil servant pay raises 
(which averaged 60 percent), the guilder lost 35 percent of 
its value, while inflation reached 28.1 percent by year\'s 
end.  Inflation continues to be a problem in 2003 with 
inflation running at 28.6 percent per annum in June 2003, 
the last month for which statistical data was available. 
(Note: The General Statistics Bureau (ABS) burned down in 
June 2003. So far, the ABS has been unable to provide 
economic data.  See Reftel.  End Note) 
 
6. In 2001 the GOS enacted a law that enabled Surinamers to 
hold savings in foreign currencies.  Because of the 
Surinamese guilder\'s historic instability and its rapid 
devaluation in 2002, Surinamers holdings in US dollars 
exceed the value of their Sf accounts.  Surinamers holding 
on to US dollars has put further pressure on the exchange 
rate since not enough US dollars are available to meet 
market demand, Telting said.  According to Telting, 
Surinamese confidence in the new currency will encourage 
Surinamers to spend their US dollars thus further reducing 
this pressure on the exchange rate. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Controlling Liquidity Controls Exchange Rate 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
7. Telting explained that the CBvS began implementing a 
program in 2002 to reduce liquidity by raising the 
commercial bank reserve requirement to help stabilize the 
exchange rate.  The CBvS raised its reserve requirement in 
2002 to 27.5% to stop the near free fall in the guilder when 
it shot from Sf 2,200 in June when exchange controls were 
lifted to Sf 3,600 in September.  The CBvS raised the 
reserve requirement again in August 2003 to 35% to even 
further reduce liquidity.  This measure has effectively 
blocked Sf 170 billion ($607,140 USD) for credit operations, 
which in turn has reduced consumer spending in general and 
imports in particular -- since Suriname is heavily dependent 
on imports for most consumer goods.  By reducing liquidity 
over the past year, Telting explained, the GOS successfully 
stabilized the exchange rate at Sf 2,800 effectively 
eliminating the imbalance which gives rise to the parallel 
market.  (Note: The guilder has maintained a sell rate of Sf 
2,700 to one USD on the parallel market since June 2003 
while the official rate is Sf 2,800.  End Note.)  By 
reducing liquidity, the local currency becomes more scarce, 
driving up its value, Telting said.  Telting estimates that 
the August 2003 reserve rate hike would continue to have 
effects into the new year such as reducing inflation and 
local interest rates, which he predicted would slide in the 
first months after introduction of the new currency.  (Note: 
One local commercial bank, the Hakrinbank, recently 
announced it would lower interest rates by 2 percent.  End 
Note.) Telting insisted that by limiting liquidity and 
increasing the reserve rate for commercial banks, the CBvS 
would not need to intervene in the foreign exchange market 
and support the SR$ with hard currency.  Telting also 
maintained that the GOS expects to eventually eliminate 
controls on the foreign exchange rate and go to a floating 
rate once the new currency is stable.  The GOS is currently 
working on an overhaul of foreign exchange laws with the 
assistance of a British consultant, he noted. 
 
----------------------- 
Fiscal Control Measures 
----------------------- 
 
8. To shore up fiscal controls, the government has taken a 
number of measures.  In 2002 it implemented a law to 
restrict GOS spending which penalizes the Minister of 
Finance for overspending with a 10-year sentence and Sf 2 
billion ($715,000 USD) fine.  The GOS is currently drafting 
similar legislation to restrict the CBvS president from 
lending excessively to the GOS.  The CBvS president will 
face similar penalties if he lends more than 10 percent of 
GDP to the GOS.  These measures are designed to 
 
 
institutionalize accountability, to provide a mechanism to 
deter the gross overspending responsible for Suriname\'s long 
history of hyperinflation, and give further confidence to 
the GOS\'s ability to maintain a stable exchange rate. 
 
------------------ 
New Notes Way-Laid 
------------------ 
 
9. On December 1 the CBvS announced that notes in 
denominations of SR$ 5 and higher were delayed.  The SR$ 1 
and 2.50 notes will be available as of January 1, as will 
coins.  According to Embassy sources, the notes printed by a 
Canadian firm needed to be reprinted because the ink ran. 
The Central Bank maintains that it will carry out the 
introduction of the new currency despite this hiccup and 
will continue to use the old currency until replacement 
notes arrive. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Introduction of New Currency May 
Cause Inflationary Pressures 
-------------------------------- 
 
10. In the past month Surinamers have expressed concern that 
with the introduction of the new currency, shopkeepers will 
be tempted to round up prices from Sf 2,800 to SR$ 3, 
causing additional inflationary pressure.  Surinamers point 
to the high inflation in the Netherlands after it converted 
from Dutch guilders to the Euro and fear that this same 
phenomenon would happen in Suriname.  Diplomats who attended 
the lunch echoed those concerns.  The Indian DCM noted that 
the GOS is unable to monitor shops to ensure that 
shopkeepers don\'t exploit the introduction of the new 
currency to raise prices to cover the fuel price increases 
earlier this year, as well as past devaluation of the 
currency.  Telting responded that the government would 
encourage the public to report any unusual price hikes. 
 
-------- 
Comment: 
-------- 
 
11. Suriname\'s adoption of the SR$ is a symbol of its 
efforts to further distance itself from its colonial power, 
the Netherlands.  The adoption of the SR$ is also a strong 
signal of Suriname\'s commitment to its membership in CARICOM 
and its integration in the Caribbean as a partner in the 
Caribbean Single Market Economy (CSME.) 
 
12.  Comment Continued: The GOS has put together a program 
of fiscal controls which should go a long way toward 
stabilizing the value of the new currency and keeping 
inflation in check -- provided the GOS adheres to these 
measures.  The Indian DCM, a trained economist, told the 
Embassy that in the short run, the new currency and the GOS 
measures to curb government spending will probably provide 
the returns sought.  As a consumerist economy heavily 
dependent on imports, only strong government resolve to 
control inflation and the money supply, while supporting the 
exchange rate with hard currency, can lead to long-run 
stability of the local currency, he maintained. 
 
13. Comment Continued:  Telting\'s explanation of the 
connection between the exchange rate and inflation appears a 
bit simplistic.  After raising the reserve requirement in 
2002 and again in 2003, the exchange rate has stabilized yet 
inflation persists at 30 percent per annum.  The real 
culprit in Suriname\'s history of hyperinflation has been the 
GOS\'s consumptive spending -- particularly on wages.  With 
over 60 percent of the workforce in civil service and 
parastatal jobs, there will be continued pressure on the GOS 
to succumb to the anticipated 2004 round of labor strikes, 
especially in the run up to elections.  Although 2003 was a 
quiet year after the 2002 strikes, there have already been 
rumblings among labor leaders that civil servants should 
expect increases.  Telting, however, maintained that the GOS 
told labor leaders to expect only modest pay hikes -- 5 
percent rather than the 60% average wage increases doled out 
in 2002.  After two years of 30-percent inflation, it is 
likely that workers will want to recoop their lost earning 
power with commensurate wage hikes.  Businesses too have 
 
 
suffered from inflation and can be expected to exploit this 
opportunity to cover their narrowed profit margins. 
 
14. Comment Continued:  The GOS can, in the short run, 
control monetary policy to keep a lid on inflation, but only 
economic expansion will guarantee the long-term economic 
stability that eludes Suriname.  Still, the GOS continues to 
defer the hard issues that will produce a vibrant economy: 
public sector reform and improving investment opportunities 
to attract employers for Suriname\'s large pool of 
underemployed and unemployed workers.  Until the GOS 
implements an economic policy that encourages expansion of 
the private sector, only sheer political will to stay the 
course with harsh monetary and fiscal policy will ensure 
Suriname\'s economic --and by extension, its political -- 
stability.  End Comment. 
 
BARNES 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"13037","1/5/2004 17:47","04PARAMARIBO7","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE773","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000007 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR IO/OPH CHRISTOPHER PRATT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, NS, UN 
SUBJECT: HIGH LEVEL PUSH FOR US CANDIDATE FOR COMMITTEE ON 
    ELIMINATION OF RACIAL DISCRIMINATION 
 
REF: STATE 773 
 
THE AMBASSADOR DELIVERED REFTEL DEMARCHE REGARDING THE 
CANDIDACY OF RALPH BOYD TO SURINAMESE FOREIGN MINISTER MARIA 
LEVENS DURING A JANUARY 5 MEETING THAT HAD BEEN PREVIOUSLY 
SCHEDULED.  THE AMBASSADOR NOTED RALPH BOYD\'S EXCELLENT 
CREDENTIALS, URGED SURINAME TO SUPPORT BOYD IN THE UPCOMING 
ELECTION AND LEFT POINTS IN A NON-PAPER.  LEVENS SEEMED 
IMPRESSED AND THANKED THE AMBASSADOR FOR THE INFORMATION BUT 
WAS OTHERWISE NON-COMMITTAL.  POST WILL REPORT FURTHER 
SURINAMESE RESPONSE, IF ANY. 
BARNES 
 
NNNN 
"
"13051","1/6/2004 11:35","04PARAMARIBO8","Embassy Paramaribo","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE443","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L  PARAMARIBO 000008 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/05/2013 
TAGS: PREL, KSUM, MARR, AMGT, NS, OAS 
SUBJECT: SURINAME FAVORS A MEANINGFUL DECLARATION AT THE 
SPECIAL SUMMIT OF THE AMERICAS 
 
REF: STATE 443 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Marsha E Barnes; reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
Summary 
-------- 
 
1.  (C) Surinamese Foreign Minister Levens told the 
Ambassador January 5 that Suriname supports the US vision for 
a meaningful declaration at the Monterey Special Summit of 
the Americas, which Surinamese President Venetiaan will 
attend.  In addition to firm commitments with firm time 
frames, Levens hoped the declaration would take into account 
the difficulties smaller nations have implementing all their 
commitments due the smaller sizes of their bureaucracies.  In 
other matters discussed, Levens told the Ambassador that 
Suriname opposes St. Kitts/Nevis succession because it would 
result in two unthinkably small countries.  Levens noted the 
need for Surname to improve controls of its borders in order 
to better combat trafficking in persons.  She did not respond 
to the Ambassador\'s inquiry regarding the status of the 
Suriname\'s response to the US request for an Article 98 
agreement.  Levens did mention, however, that the Embassy 
should soon receive the options Suriname will put forward for 
improving the Embassy\'s security setback.  End Summary. 
 
Summit of the Americas 
---------------------- 
 
2.  (C) The Ambassador met Surinamese Foreign Minister Maria 
Levens January 5 and made reftel points on the need to 
produce a meaningful declaration at the Special Summit of the 
Americas.  Referring to A/S Norieiga\'s letter to Surinamese 
Ambassador Illes (copied was provided to the Ministry 
December 30), the Ambassador stressed the need for a focused 
declaration that contains specific action items with specific 
time frames  She asked for Suriname\'s help to achieve firm 
commitments in four key areas: (a) 
transparency/anti-corruption; (b) investment in human 
capital, especially in education and on HIV/AIDS; (c) 
economic development as the key driving force to reduce 
poverty, highlighting the roles that FTAA and investment can 
play; and (d) explicit mention of the September 11 terrorist 
attacks and subsequent efforts to make the Western Hemisphere 
safe.  The Ambassador noted that this will be the first 
meeting of all Western Hemisphere leaders since September 11 
and pointed out that the President is looking forward to the 
discussions at Monterey, which will demonstrate continued US 
engagement in the hemisphere. 
 
3.  (C) Levens responded that Suriname supports the US vision 
of a concrete declaration at Monterey.  She said she had 
spoken about the US vision with at least one CARICOM 
colleague and that CARICOM was working on the draft of the 
Declaration with an eye to making sure it contained clear 
commitments.  Levens mentioned that the CARICOM was working 
on the draft declaration on behalf of the entire community. 
 
4.  (C) Levens noted the draft Declaration already had many 
commitments and stressed it was also important to focus on 
execution of these commitments.  To that end, the Declaration 
needed to address the special problems faced by smaller 
countries, according to Levens.  She explained that, while 
the smaller countries have the same number of commitments to 
implement, they oftentimes have much smaller bureaucracies on 
which to rely to get the job done.  Smaller countries are 
often behind the larger countries in meeting their 
commitments, she continued, but it is not a question of 
support for those commitments, but rather a question of size, 
and \"size matters.\"  The Ambassador expressed her sympathy 
for the plight of the smaller countries and noted that this 
was one reason, among others, that the US has sought to 
reduce the number of resolution being considered at the UN. 
 
5.  (C) Levens confirmed that Surinamese President Venetiaan 
will attend the Monterey summit and expressed hope that the 
summit would \"bring back proof of cooperation\".  She 
explained that there were too many tensions among countries 
in the region and that it was hard for Suriname to work in 
this environment.  Levens lamented that Suriname is often 
seen as a South American country, but participated as a 
Caribbean country in most fora.  This places Suriname 
uncomfortably between CARICOM and MERCOSUR.  She noted that 
 
 
Suriname has little contact with Central American nations, 
Mexico or Canada, but agreed with the Ambassador that 
Suriname played a special role vis-a-vis Brazil and that 
contact with the rest of South American was much better. 
 
St. Kitts/Nevis 
--------------- 
 
6.  (C) Following up on the Minister\'s comments about the 
problems of small countries, the Ambassador asked Levens for 
Suriname\'s position on St. Kitts/Nevis secession, stressing 
US concerns for the future of such small countries should 
secession occur.  Levens replied that Suriname supported the 
CARICOM position, which made clear that it would be better 
for secession not to occur, which would result in two 
unthinkably small countries. 
 
Article 98 
---------- 
 
7.  (C) The Ambassador reminded Levens that the US still 
awaited a response to our request for an Article 98 
agreement, highlighting the recent comments by CARICOM\'s 
Carrington on the compatibility of an Article 98 agreements 
and support for the ICC.  Levens did not respond. 
 
TIP 
--- 
 
8.  (C) The Ambassador expressed her concern that Suriname 
needed to continue to make efforts to combat Trafficking in 
Persons.  Levens responded that Suriname\'s biggest problem in 
this regard is controlling its borders, which are too long 
and remote.  She told the Ambassador that she has urged 
Minister of Justice/Police Gilds to work closely with his 
Defense Ministry counterpart to develop effective border 
controls that would prevent trafficking in persons.  She 
noted that she believed that Suriname has an effective method 
of controlling entries and exits from its international 
airport.  (Comment.  It is unclear whether Levens\' remarks 
continue to reflect her previously expressed confusion about 
the difference between trafficking in persons and alien 
smuggling.  End Comment.) 
 
Road Setback 
------------ 
 
9.  (C) Levens told the Ambassador that the Embassy should 
hear from the Ministry of Public Works possibly later this 
week concerning options on the Embassy\'s request for 
realignment of the road in front of the Embassy to improve 
the Embassy\'s security setback. 
BARNES 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"13052","1/6/2004 12:14","04PARAMARIBO9","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE348293","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000009 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR: MARK SEIBEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, EAGR, NS 
SUBJECT: SURINAME IMPOSES TEMPORARY BAN ON IMPORT OF US BEEF 
 
    REF: STATE 348293 
 
SURINAME HAS TAKEN MEASURES TO BAN US BEEF IMPORTS DUE TO 
THE UNCERTAINTY SURROUNDING THE CONFIRMED CASE OF BOVINE 
SPONGIFORM ENCEPHALPATHY (BSE) IN THE US.  PER REFTEL 
REQUEST, ON DECEMBER 24, 2003, THE EMBASSY DELIVERED THE BSE 
NOTIFICATION TO THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE.  ON JANUARY 4, 
DIRECTOR OF ANIMAL PRODUCTION AND HEALTH EDMUND ROZENBLAD 
INFORMED THE EMBASSY THAT BEEF IMPORTS FROM THE US WERE 
TEMPORARILY BANNED UNTIL FURTHER NOTICE.  THE PERMANENT 
SECRETARY OF THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND 
 
SIPDIS 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, JASWANT SAHTOE MADE A PUBLIC ANNOUNCEMENT 
ON JANUARY 2 THAT THE IMPORT OF RUMINANTS, BEEF AND BEEF 
PRODUCTS FROM THE USA ARE PROHIBITED UNTIL THE MINISTRY IS 
CONVINCED THAT THERE IS NO FURTHER DANGER OR THREAT TO 
ANIMAL AND HUMAN HEALTH. 
 
BARNES 
 
NNNN 
"
"13329","1/16/2004 10:36","04PARAMARIBO31","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE6662","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000031 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR: MARK SEIBEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: ETRD, NS, WTO 
SUBJECT: SURINAME RECEIVED US TRADE REPRESENTATIVE ROBERT B. 
ZOELLICK\'S LETTER ON MOVING THE WTO DOHA NEGOTIATIONS 
    FORWARD IN 2004 
 
REF: STATE 006662 
 
IN RESPONSE TO REFTEL REQUEST, ON JANUARY 14 THE EMBASSY 
VERIFIED THROUGH THE MINISTRY OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY THAT 
MINISTER MICHAEL JONG TJIEN FA HAD RECEIVED US TRADE 
REPRESENTATIVE ROBERT B. ZOELLICK\'S LETTER ON JANUARY 12. 
THE MINISTRY MADE NO FURTHER COMMENT IN RESPONSE TO THE 
LETTER. 
 
BARNES 
 
NNNN 
            2004PARAMA00031 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
 
v1.6.3 
"
"13330","1/16/2004 10:37","04PARAMARIBO33","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000033 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, NS, UN 
SUBJECT: SURINAME TO SUPPORT US CANDIDATE TO THE COMMITTEE 
ON THE ELIMINATION OF ALL FORMS OF RACIAL DISCRIMINATION 
 
 
    REF: STATE 773 
 
IN RESPONSE TO REFTEL REQUEST, SURINAME\'S MINISTRY OF 
FOREIGN AFFAIRS FORWARDED A DIPNOTE TO THE EMBASSY JANUARY 
13 EXPRESSING SUPPORT FOR THE US CANDIDATE TO THE COMMITTEE 
ON THE ELIMINATION OF ALL FORMS OF RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN 
ELECTIONS TO BE HELD ON JANUARY 14. 
BARNES 
 
NNNN 
            2004PARAMA00033 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
 
v1.6.3 
"
"13331","1/16/2004 10:38","04PARAMARIBO35","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE1130","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000035 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR: MSEIBEL, FOR EB: OES: DWILBUR 
BRASILIA FOR ENVIRONMENTAL HUB 
SAN JOSE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL HUB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV, PREL, NS 
SUBJECT: SURINAME: WHITE WATER TO BLUE WATER PARTNERSHIP 
CONFERENCE INVITATION EXTENDED 
 
REF: STATE 1130 
 
PER REFTEL REQUEST, ON JANUARY 6 THE EMBASSY FORWARDED U/S 
PAULA DOBRIANSKI\'S LETTER OF INVITATION TO THE MINISTER OF 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, AND FISHERIES (LVV) 
GEETAPERSAD GANGERAM PANDAY TO ATTEND THE WHITE WATER TO 
BLUE WATER PARTNERSHIP CONFERENCE TO BE HELD IN MIAMI ON 
MARCH 21-26.  THE EMBASSY ALSO FORWARDED A COPY OF THE 
INVITATION LETTER TO THE MINISTERS OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS, 
EDUCATION, PUBLIC HEALTH, TRANSPORT, COMMUNICATIONS AND 
TOURISM, LABOR, TECHNOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENT, FINANCE, AND 
NATURAL RESOURCES.  ON JANUARY 12, MINISTRY OF LVV PERMANENT 
SECRETARY AGRICULTURE JASWANT SAHTOE INFORMED THE EMBASSY 
 
SIPDIS 
THAT SURINAME INTENDS TO ATTEND THE CONFERENCE AND THAT THE 
MINISTRY OF LVV WAS FORMING THE DELEGATION. 
 
BARNES 
 
NNNN 
"
"13333","1/16/2004 11:22","04PARAMARIBO39","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","04PARAMARIBO517","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  PARAMARIBO 000039 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/PD - APRUITT, IIP/G/WHA - CBARONE, IIP/T/ES - 
GCHRISTISON, WHA/CAR - MSEIBEL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO, EAGR, PREL, NS 
SUBJECT: IIP U.S. RICE POLICY SPEAKER DR. GAIL CRAMER WINS 
SURINAMERS OVER, DISPELS POPULAR MISCONCEPTIONS ABOUT US 
RICE POLICY 
 
Ref: PARAMARIBO 517 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  Dr. Gail Cramer, the Head of the Department of 
Agricultural Economics and Agribusiness at Louisiana State 
University, educated Surinamers about U.S. Rice Policy 
during an October 12-16 visit to Suriname.  He met with a 
variety of government officials, politicians, rice farmers 
and exporters both in Nickerie, Suriname\'s rice district, 
and in the capital Paramaribo; toured Suriname\'s most 
successful rice company; attended an Amcham-hosted 
breakfast; taped an impromptu television program; and 
delivered two well-received public lectures.  Throughout his 
visit, Dr. Cramer emphasized the US\'s commitment to free 
trade and its desire to end agricultural subsidies through 
World Trade Organization negotiations; the domestic 
considerations that drive US agricultural policy; and facts 
about the US\'s PL480 program, particularly with regard to 
Jamaica.  While he acknowledged the long list of problems 
plaguing Suriname\'s rice sector, Dr. Cramer called on 
Surinamers to take steps that would allow Suriname to become 
more competitive on the global rice market, steps such as 
the reduction of production costs, investment in 
infrastructure and research, the tapping of new markets, and 
increased production of rice products.  By presenting 
complex US rice policy in a straightforward manner, Dr. 
Cramer advanced key USG themes, specifically that of free 
trade and mutual understanding, and effectively disarmed 
critics of US rice policy.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
CRAMER WOWS AUDIENCE IN NICKERIE, SURINAME\'S RICE DISTRICT 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
2.  IIP US Agricultural Policy speaker Dr. Gail Cramer, the 
Head of the Department of Agricultural Economics and 
Agribusiness at Louisiana State University, visited Suriname 
October 12-16 to educate Surinamers about US rice policy. 
During an October 14 visit to Nickerie, Suriname\'s rice 
district, Dr. Cramer met with farmers and government 
officials to discuss their concerns regarding the rice 
sector -- rice is Suriname\'s most important agricultural 
product.  Hardheo Ramadhin, the District Commissioner for 
Nickerie, and Kadi Kartosoewito, Director of Adron, a rice 
research center, spoke at length with Cramer about the lack 
of investment in the rice sector, the lack of funding for 
research to develop new varieties of grains, and the unfair 
competition Suriname faces from larger rice growing 
countries, such as the United States.  Both men voiced the 
common misperception that the United States is dumping 
subsidized American rice on the Caricom market through the 
PL480 program in Jamaica.  (See Reftel for further 
discussion of Suriname\'s troubled rice sector). 
 
3.  Dr. Cramer addressed these concerns during a lecture 
held at Adron, which was attended by influential rice 
farmers and exporters.  Cramer rejected the claim that the 
United States\' rice policy was hurting Suriname, one of 
Caricom\'s two rice exporting countries.  He explained that 
the United States is subsidizing rice, but is not providing 
rice export subsidies or subsidies to cover production 
costs.  According to Cramer, U.S. farmers can grow rice 
cheaper than all but two countries, even without US 
government assistance.  Countering allegations that the U.S. 
is pursuing a double standard by subsidizing its domestic 
rice industry on the one hand and by promoting free trade on 
the other, Cramer said that the U.S. government was prepared 
to terminate all rice subsidies in 2002.  However, due to 
large surpluses and a decrease in world rice prices, the USG 
was forced to change course.  The USG remains committed to 
cutting subsidies only via World Trade Organization talks, 
Cramer said, as domestic political realities make it 
impossible for the US to terminate subsidies unilaterally. 
As for the PL480 program, Cramer explained that the U.S. had 
stopped providing rice to Jamaica for at least two years and 
that all current sales to Jamaica are commercial in nature. 
Dr. Cramer urged Surinamers to increase their 
competitiveness by reducing production costs, investing in 
research and infrastructure, tapping into new markets, and 
expanding production of rice products. 
 
4. Two issues raised by Cramer -- the degree to which US 
domestic politics influences US rice policy and the PL 480 
program with Jamaica -- sparked lively discussions.  Rice 
stakeholders were surprised about the active role Congress 
has played since 1929 in passing specific legislation to 
 
support US rice farmers and about the billions of dollars in 
subsidies rice farmers receive annually.  Attendees were 
surprised to learn that the United States is no longer 
supplying Jamaica with cheap American rice and expressed 
appreciation to Dr. Cramer for dispelling that popular 
misconception.  In reaction to Dr. Cramer\'s presentation, 
Leakhat Mahawathkan, a National Assembly member who is also 
a rice farmer, told attendees that local politicians should 
learn from the US example and educate themselves even more 
about the rice sector and that the Government of Suriname 
should subsidize rice farmers.  Mahawatkhan and the other 
attendees were so impressed with Dr. Cramer\'s presentation 
that they arranged for him to deliver an impromptu 
presentation on a local television program.  The program was 
later dubbed in Dutch and Hindi to attract a wider audience. 
 
-------------------- 
VISIT TO A RICE FARM 
-------------------- 
 
5.  Following his lecture, Dr. Cramer attended a lunch 
hosted by the Soechit family, one of the most important and 
successful rice producers in the country, and toured the 
family\'s rice company.  During the tour, Dr. Cramer had the 
opportunity to view the entire rice production process, from 
harvesting, to the drying and grinding of rice paddy, to the 
packaging of the end product.  The Soechit family later told 
the Embassy that they appreciated the opportunity to discuss 
the intricacies of the rice business with an American rice 
expert, one who had research experience in neighboring 
Guyana and who knew firsthand about the type of difficulties 
Surinamese farmers are currently facing. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
MEETING WITH POLICYMAKERS, RICE EXPERTS IN PARAMARIBO 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
6.  Dr. Cramer reiterated the points made with various 
interlocutors in Nickerie during a breakfast sponsored by 
the American Chamber of Commerce, a meeting with Rick Van 
Raavenswaay of Celos, the rice institute at Anton De Kom 
University, and a meeting with Jaswananth Sathoe, the 
Ministry of Agriculture\'s Permanent Secretary, in 
Paramaribo.  While Cramer successfully conveyed U.S. rice 
policy to Van Raavenswaay and Amcham members, the meeting 
with Sathoe proved to be exasperating.  Even though the 
Embassy stressed that Dr. Cramer is a university professor 
and not a government official, Sathoe refused to permit 
Cramer to speak, declaring \"I do not want to listen to what 
you [Cramer] have to say.\"  While the meeting with Sathoe 
amounted to a one-way barrage about the evils of US rice 
policy, which allegedly prevents small countries like 
Suriname from benefiting from free trade, it exposed Cramer 
to Surinamese sensitivities on this subject and to the 
tendency by some Surinamers to blame the US for their 
troubles. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
DR. CRAMER CAPTIVATES AUDIENCE WITH HIS PARAMARIBO LECTURE 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
7.  Dr. Cramer delivered a well-received lecture October 15 
on US rice policy to a group of influential policymakers and 
rice stakeholders, including the Ministers of Trade and 
Industry and Agriculture, and political leaders from various 
parties.  Like others before them, the audience was 
surprised by the amount of subsidies US rice farmers receive 
from the USG, the US commitment to ending subsidies via the 
World Trade Organization, and the termination of the US 
PL480 rice program for Jamaica.  Because Dr. Cramer managed 
to disarm critics of US rice policy with his effective 
presentation, members of the audience focused on taking 
advantage of the Minister of Trade and Industry\'s presence 
to urge the government to invest in infrastructure and 
research, to help Surinamese farmers to compete, and to 
search for new markets.  Many stayed for some time after Dr. 
Cramer\'s lecture to continue one-on-one discussions with 
him. 
 
--------- 
GPRA DATA 
--------- 
 
8.  Justification and objectives:  Embassy intended to 
promote a better grasp of U.S. Rice Policy and mutual 
understanding with Dr. Cramer\'s visit.  Suriname is one of 
Caricom\'s two rice-producing countries.  Many stakeholders 
in the rice sector, which has been in decline for some time 
now, blame the US for adding to Suriname\'s woes by providing 
 
cheap rice to Jamaica, which reportedly dumps cheap American 
rice on the Caricom market.  Surinamers also regularly 
denounce the US for promoting free trade on one hand and for 
providing subsidies to its farmers on the other.  Embassy 
hoped that Dr. Cramer\'s visit would dispel myths and provide 
factual information about US rice policy to Surinamese rice 
stakeholders.  Several contacts had requested that the 
Embassy make some presentations on this topic, but due to 
lack of information, the Embassy was unable to fulfill these 
requests.  Thanks to IIP\'s responsiveness and excellent 
coordination, we were able to find the perfect speaker for 
this narrow topic. 
 
-------------- 
RESULTS/IMPACT 
-------------- 
 
9.  Results/Impact:  Dr. Cramer did not convince many local 
rice merchants to support free trade in agriculture. 
Instead, discussions about the level of US subsidies/support 
to US rice farmers encouraged calls for GOS subsidies as 
well as greater GOS investment in Suriname\'s rice industry 
(i.e. infrastructure improvements, development of new 
varieties, and business management consulting).  However, 
Dr. Cramer\'s visit helped educate Surinamers, particularly 
the movers and shakers in the rice sector, about US rice 
policy, the domestic considerations US politicians must take 
into account, the US commitment to free trade, and the PL480 
program.  Many contacts expressed appreciation for this 
Embassy initiative, noting that Dr. Cramer provided them 
with information on US rice policy that they had no access 
to previously and that their opinions had changed in favor 
of the U.S. on this topic. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
10.  Dr. Cramer succeeded in providing Surinamers with 
information on an issue that they knew little about but 
often criticized: U.S. rice policy.  With his well- 
articulated, engaging style, Dr. Cramer captivated audiences 
in Paramaribo and in Nickerie District with the facts about 
US rice policy, while dispelling popular misconceptions 
about the US\'s alleged \"hypocrisy\" regarding free trade and 
its \"dumping\" of rice on the Caricom market.  To our 
delight, Dr. Cramer\'s visit prompted a lively discussion by 
Surinamers of the need for politicians to educate themselves 
about the rice sector in order to make more informed 
decisions about the country\'s rice policy.  The Embassy 
recommends Dr. Cramer as a speaker to other posts.  End 
Comment. 
 
BARNES 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"13347","1/16/2004 18:36","04PARAMARIBO44","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  PARAMARIBO 000044 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR MSEIBEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EPET, PBTS, FR, NS 
SUBJECT:  SURINAME\'S SERVICE-STATION OWNERS DEMAND HIGHER 
PROFIT MARGINS AFTER FOUR YEARS OF HIGH INFLATION 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED  -- PLEASE TREAT ACCORDINGLY 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (U) On January 6, Suriname\'s service-station owners 
threatened to resume a December 2003 strike to protest 
the government\'s refusal to negotiate an increase in 
profit margins, which had remained stagnant since a 1999 
agreement.  Since that agreement, service-station owners 
have suffered a steady decline in profits, while the 
average inflation for the period was over 50 percent. In 
response to the December 2003 strike by service-station 
owners, the GOS granted the local subsidiaries of 
international oil companies Shell, Texaco, and Esso, 
which import and distribute gasoline in Suriname, a $0.01 
USD per liter increase in their commercial margin, which 
they in turn passed on to service stations in a hefty 50 
percent increase, but far shy of the 200 percent increase 
service-station owners had demanded.  With the GOS wary 
of the political ramifications of another gasoline price 
hike, it is unlikely to pass along the increased cost, 
leaving it to absorb increased fuel costs in terms of 
lower tax revenues.  Still, Suriname\'s bargain-basement 
gasoline provides a booming business to fuel smugglers 
who service French Guiana where consumers pay nearly 
twice as much for gasoline as their \"subsidized\" 
neighbor.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
Service-station Owners Demand Profit-Margin Increases 
after Four Years of Inflation and Rising Costs 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
2. (U) On January 5, Suriname\'s service-station owners 
threatened to resume a December 2003 strike to protest 
the government\'s refusal to increase service-station 
profit margins.  Service-station owners demanded a 10 
percent per liter profit margin versus the previous 
margin of 2.9 percent per liter.  The government 
steadfastly refused to negotiate with service-station 
owners, insisting that the owners negotiate instead with 
the local subsidiaries of international oil companies 
Shell, Esso, and Texaco, which import and distribute 
gasoline in Suriname. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Price Controls and Profit Margin Limits 
--------------------------------------- 
 
3. (U) The center of the service-station owners\' dispute 
is the GOS\'s intricate system of price controls through 
controlling profit margins.  In 1985 during Suriname\'s 
period of military rule, the GOS established price 
controls on a basket of goods (which included among other 
things onions, brown beans, bread, and cooking oil) to 
ensure that basic needs were met.  In 2003, the GOS began 
to eliminate those controls, reducing that basket to baby 
formula, flour, milk, and gasoline. 
 
4. (SBU) The price control on gasoline provided for the 
cost of gasoline on the world market, a margin of profit 
for the oil company and the service station, and taxes to 
the government.  In 1999, with local inflation running 
112 percent, the GOS established a fixed price for 
gasoline at 1.10 Surinamese dollars (SRD) and reached an 
agreement with the service-station owners to grant them a 
$0.0172 USD per liter profit margin.  In a country where 
hard currency is not always available on the commercial 
market, the 1999 agreement ensured that the GOS would 
provide oil companies and service-station owners US 
dollars to pay for gasoline imports.  (Although in 
October 2003, one Exxon representative reported to the 
Embassy that Exxon was frustrated because it was unable 
to get the GOS to allow for repatriation of profits.) 
With the sometimes wide gap between the official rate and 
the parallel market rate, the 1999 agreement also 
 
 
provided for a formula to give service-station owners 
compensation for the gap.  Under this complicated price- 
control formula, as the world price of oil fluctuated and 
the gap between the parallel market and official exchange 
rates grew, the GOS\'s absorbed the difference in terms of 
lower tax revenues on gasoline. 
 
-------------------------- 
March 2003 GOS Vows to 
End Gas Price Controls... 
-------------------------- 
 
5. (U) By March 2003, the GOS revenues on gasoline 
disappeared as gasoline prices rose, leaving the GOS 
essentially subsidizing gasoline.  The GOS made the 
politically tough decision to fix a new price for 
gasoline, shifting the price from SRD 1.10 ($0.41 USD) to 
SRD 1.60 ($0.60 USD) per liter of gasoline, a hefty 45 
percent increase.  At the time, Minister of Finance 
Humphrey Hildenberg announced that the GOS would stop 
controlling the price of gasoline and allow the market to 
set the price.  This, however, has so far not 
materialized. 
 
----------------------------- 
...But Fails to Keep its Word 
----------------------------- 
 
6. (U) Despite the hefty gasoline price hike, none of 
that increase was passed on to either the service-station 
owners or to the oil companies.  And with five years of 
high inflation (which averaged over 50 percent over that 
period), service-station owners have been hard pressed to 
make ends meet on the fixed profit margin.  On December 
16-17, 2003, service-station owners held a strike to 
demand that the GOS honor the 1999 agreement and 
renegotiate the profit margin.  The GOS responded that it 
was not responsible for setting profit margins but rather 
the oil companies, Shell, Texaco, and Esso, were. 
Chairman of the Suriname Service-station Exploration 
Union (SSEB) Robert van Dijk told the Embassy that the 
union called an end to the strike after agreeing to 
resume negotiations with the oil companies. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
GOS Usurps Oil Companies\' Role in Profit Margins 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
7. (SBU) Suriname\'s Esso director Abraham Brandon 
explained to the Embassy that the GOS\'s 1999 agreement 
usurped the role of oil distribution companies.  The 
service-station owners don\'t have a contract with the 
government, Brandon said, but rather with the oil 
companies and, therefore, negotiations should be between 
oil companies and service-station owners.  Brandon told 
the Embassy that in late December the GOS agreed to give 
the local oil companies a $0.01 USD per liter increase 
(from $0.0725 USD to $0.0825 USD per liter) in their 
commercial margin and that the oil companies would 
negotiate the service-station owners\' profit margins 
directly.  On January 5, oil companies and service- 
station owners agreed to a 4.27 percent per liter profit 
margin (a 50 percent increase) versus the 10 percent per 
liter margin they sought.  SSEB was very unhappy with the 
agreement and in a January 6 press briefing announced 
that it was still considering resuming the strike. 
Brandon called the service-station owners\' 10 percent 
demand \"ludicrous\" and said that it amounted to a 200 
percent increase. 
 
8.  (SBU) Brandon told the Embassy that he did not expect 
the GOS to raise gasoline prices to pass on the increased 
profit margin to consumers.  The government should have 
planned for the profit margin increase when it raised 
gasoline prices in March 2003, Brandon told the Embassy. 
Now the government will have to absorb the profit margin 
increase in the way of lower revenues, he concluded. 
 
-------- 
 
 
Comment: 
-------- 
 
9. (U) The GOS is very slowly weaning the Surinamese 
consumer away from price controls, subsidies, and price 
supports, but it seems that this one will have to wait 
until after the next elections.  With an estimated 
200,000 cars on the road, Surinamers like their cars and 
have come to expect cheap gas, which makes increasing the 
price of gasoline a politically high-risk move.  It is 
unlikely that the GOS will pass on the higher cost of 
gasoline to consumers or that it will abandon profit 
margin limits on gasoline anytime soon.  In the meantime, 
the GOS will continue to be a generous neighbor to French 
Guiana where fuel smugglers have reaped handsome profits 
ferrying Suriname\'s bargain-basement gasoline unfettered 
across the Marowijne River -- and all at Surinamese 
taxpayers\' expense.  End Comment. 
 
BARNES 
 
 
NNNN 
 
            2004PARAMA00044 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
 
v1.6.3 
"
"13468","1/23/2004 12:57","04PARAMARIBO58","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","03PARAMARIBO256|04GEORGETOWN43","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000058 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, MARR, NS, GY 
SUBJECT: SURINAME PROPOSES NEW ROUND OF BORDER TALKS WITH 
GUYANA IN FEBRUARY 
 
REFS: (A) GEORGETOWN 43; (B) 03 PARAMARIBO 256 
 
    1.  SURINAMESE FOREIGN MINISTER MARIE LEVENS ANNOUNCED ON 
JANUARY 11 PLANS TO CONTINUE TALKS WITH GUYANA OVER THE 
ONGOING BORDER DISPUTE NEXT MONTH.  THIS ANNOUNCEMENT CAME 
ON THE HEELS OF PUBLIC STATEMENTS BY GUYANESE FOREIGN 
MINISTER RUDY INSANALLY, WHO, DURING A RECENT TRIP TO 
EASTERN GUYANA, EXPRESSED SUPPORT FOR CONTINUED DIALOGUE 
BETWEEN SURINAME AND GUYANA ON THE DISPUTE.  (SEE REF. A.) 
THE TWO BORDER COMMISSIONS LAST MET IN MARCH 2003; HOWEVER, 
TALKS BROKE OFF AFTER SURINAME ANGERED GUYANA BY RELEASING 
AN OFFICIAL MAP, WHICH LABELED THE DISPUTED TIGRI/NEW RIVER 
TRIANGLE AS SURINAMESE TERRITORY.  IN RETURN, THE GOG FLEXED 
ITS MUSCLE BY SENDING A NAVY PATROL BOAT UP THE CORANTIJN 
RIVER. 
 
2.  WHILE IT AWAITS AN OFFICIAL RESPONSE FROM GUYANA 
REGARDING THE PROPOSED TALKS, THE GOS ANNOUNCED PENDING 
CHANGES IN ITS BORDER COMMISSION.  HANS LIM A PO, THE HEAD 
OF THE COMMISSION, TOLD THE EMBASSY THAT THE COMMISSION WILL 
BE REDUCED IN SIZE: TWO COMMISSION MEMBERS HAVE BEEN POSTED 
ABROAD AND THERE ARE NO PLANS TO REPLACE THEM.  IN ADDITION, 
A THIRD MEMBER INTENDS TO RETIRE FROM PUBLIC DUTIES, BUT IT 
IS AS YET UNDETERMINED WHETHER HE WILL RETAIN HIS POSITION 
ON THE BORDER COMMISSION. 
 
3.  WHILE IT PURSUES A DIPLOMATIC SOLUTION TO THE ONGOING 
DISPUTE, SURINAME HAS NOT HESITATED TO RATTLE ITS SABERS. 
ACCORDING TO THE JANUARY 10TH EDITION OF LOCAL DAILY \"DE 
WARE TIJD,\" MINISTER OF DEFENSE RONALD ASSEN STRESSED THE 
NEED FOR SURINAME\'S ARMED FORCES TO BECOME BETTER EQUIPPED 
TO PROTECT THE COUNTRY AGAINST GUYANA.  IN COMMENTS MARKING 
THE ARMED FORCES\' NEW YEAR CELEBRATIONS, ASSEN COUNTERED 
    REMARKS HE ATTRIBUTED TO THE GUYANESE MILITARY\'S CHIEF OF 
STAFF, WHO REPORTEDLY CALLED FOR A STRONG GUYANESE MILITARY 
POSITION TO BACK THE GUYANESE BORDER COMMISSION.  ASSEN ALSO 
ADDED THAT SURINAME MUST TAKE INTO CONSIDERATION GUYANA\'S 
SIGNING AN ARTICLE 98 AGREEMENT WITH THE US -- AND THE 
RESULTING LIKELIHOOD OF GREATER U.S. RESOURCE SUPPORT FOR 
THE GUYANESE ARMY -- AS IT POSITIONS ITSELF FOR THE NEXT 
ROUND OF TALKS. 
 
4. COMMENT.  THE ONGOING BORDER DISPUTE TALKS BETWEEN 
SURINAME AND GUYANA CONTINUE TO INCH ALONG WITH THE 
OCCASIONAL FLARE-UPS, WHICH USUALLY CULMINATE IN 
NATIONALISTIC RHETORIC AND MILITARY POSTURING.  CHANGES IN 
SURINAME\'S BORDER COMMISSION DELEGATION WILL NOT LIKELY HAVE 
ANY IMPACT ON SURINAME\'S APPROACH.  ITS FUNDAMENTAL POSITION 
WILL REMAIN UNCHANGED -- REFUSAL TO SUPPORT OIL EXPLORATION 
IN THE DISPUTED MARITIME AREA THAT WOULD BENEFIT BOTH 
COUNTRIES WHILE INSISTING ON DEALING WITH THE BORDER DISPUTE 
IN ITS ENTIRETY, INCLUDING RESOLVING SOVEREIGNTY OF THE 
TIGRI/NEW RIVER TRIANGLE AND DEMARCATING THE RIVER BOUNDARY. 
ON A MORE POSITIVE NOTE, THE RECENT ARTICLE 98 AGREEMENT 
BETWEEN GUYANA AND THE UNITED STATES MAY ENCOURAGE SURINAME 
TO PURSUE A SIMILAR AGREEMENT TO MAINTAIN PARITY WITH ITS 
WESTERN NEIGHBOR.  END COMMENT. 
 
BARNES 
 
NNNN 
            2004PARAMA00058 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
 
v1.6.3 
"
"13596","1/29/2004 10:41","04PARAMARIBO76","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE14340","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000076 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR - MSEIBEL 
DEPT FOR AC/ISN, IO/UNP, USUN (POL), AND GENEVA (CD) 
 
    E.O. 12958: DECL: N/A 
TAGS: PARM, PREL, NS, CDG, UNGA 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE ON SUPPORT FOR THE ELECTION OF REFORM- 
MINDED CANDIDATE TO CHAIR 59TH UNFC SESSION DELIVERED 
 
REF: STATE 14340 
 
PER REFTEL REQUEST, ON JANUARY 25, THE EMBASSY CONVEYED US 
SUPPORT OF A REFORM-MINDED CANDIDATE TO CHAIR THE UNGA FIRST 
DISARMAMENT AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY COMMITTEE TO JEANELLE 
VAN GLAANENWEYGEL, THE HEAD OF THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN 
AFFAIRS INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS DEPARTMENT.  WHILE 
EMBASSY STILL AWAITS A DEFINITE STANCE ON THE MATTER, WE 
NOTE THAT THE GOS HAS VOICED SUPPORT FOR UN REFORMS 
PREVIOUSLY AND WOULD LIKELY WELCOME THE ELECTION OF A REFORM- 
MINDED FIRST COMMITTEE CHAIR. 
 
BARNES 
 
NNNN 
            2004PARAMA00076 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
 
v1.6.3 
"
"13628","1/30/2004 10:44","04PARAMARIBO80","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04REFS:3PARAMARIBO735","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000080 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR MSEIBEL 
    BRIDGETOWN PLEASE PASS TO RROHRER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, EAGR, ECON, KHIV, NS 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT VENETIAAN\'S VISIT TO THE SPECIAL SUMMIT 
OF THE AMERICAS GARNERS LOCAL ATTENTION 
 
REFS: 03 PARAMARIBO 735 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  PLEASE HANDLE ACCORDINGLY. 
 
1.  (U) THE VISIT OF PRESIDENT RONALD VENETIAAN AND OTHER 
SURINAMESE GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS, INCLUDING MINISTER OF TRADE 
AND INDUSTRY MICHAEL JONG TJIEN FA, TO THE SPECIAL SUMMIT OF 
THE AMERICAS IN MONTEREY, MEXICO, RECEIVED MUCH PRESS 
ATTENTION IN SURINAME.  ACCORDING TO PRESS REPORTS, UPON HIS 
RETURN FROM MEXICO, PRESIDENT VENETIAAN MADE THE FOLLOWING 
POINTS: 
 
--   SUMMIT TALKS WERE \"DIFFICULT\" AS COUNTRIES WITH SMALL 
     ECONOMIES LIKE SURINAME WERE UNSUCCESSFUL IN THEIR BID 
     TO POSTPONE THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE FREE TRADE AREA 
     OF THE AMERICAS (FTAA). 
 
--   THE GENERAL PUBLIC IN THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE IS LOSING 
     FAITH IN DEMOCRACY AND POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS BECAUSE 
     THE PROMISE OF DEVELOPMENT THROUGH ECONOMIC REFORMS AND 
     FREE TRADE HAS NOT MATERIALIZED. 
 
--   POLITICAL LEADERS NEED TO EFFECTIVELY HARNESS THE 
     HEMISPHERE\'S MULTI-CULTURAL POPULATIONS TO PROMOTE 
         MUTUAL RESPECT AND INTERESTS. 
 
2.  (U) ABSENT IN VENETIAAN\'S COMMENTS WERE CONCERNS VOICED 
JUST PRIOR TO VENETIAAN\'S DEPARTURE BY FOREIGN MINISTER 
MARIE LEVENS, WHO DID NOT TRAVEL TO MEXICO DUE TO BACK 
PROBLEMS, THAT THE UNITED STATES\' PREOCCUPATION WITH THE WAR 
AGAINST TERRORISM AND OTHER SECURITY INTERESTS MAY INTERFERE 
WITH THE IMPLEMENTATION OF FTAA AND THE CARIBBEAN SINGLE 
MARKET ECONOMY. 
 
3. (U) ON A MORE CONCRETE NOTE, VENETIAAN DECLARED THAT 
SURINAME HAD TAKEN ADVANTAGE OF THE SUMMIT\'S MARGINS TO 
FORWARD ITS AGENDA ON TWO KEY FRONTS: RICE EXPORTS TO 
MERCOSUR AND THE CANDIDACY OF A ONE-TIME SURINAMESE DIPLOMAT 
FOR A KEY ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES (OAS) POSITION. 
DETERMINED TO SECURE MARKETS FOR SURINAME\'S MOST IMPORTANT 
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCT (RICE), GOS OFFICIALS SOUGHT THE 
SUPPORT OF THEIR URUGUAYAN COUNTERPARTS FOR SURINAMESE RICE 
EXPORTS TO BRAZIL AND OTHER MERCOSUR COUNTRIES.  THEY ALSO 
LOBBIED VARIOUS REPRESENTATIVES FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF 
ALBERT RAMDIN, CURRENTLY AN ADVISOR TO OAS HEAD CESAR 
GAVIRIA, TO THE POSITION OF OAS ASSISTANT SECRETARY GENERAL. 
(SEE REFTEL.) 
 
4.  (SBU) MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AMERICAS DEPARTMENT 
HEAD TERENCE CRAIG (PLEASE PROTECT) INDICATED TO THE EMBASSY 
THAT CARICOM MEMBERS HAVE INFORMALLY AGREED TO ENDORSE 
RAMDIN\'S CANDIDACY AND THAT THIS POSITION WILL BE MADE 
OFFICIAL DURING A CARICOM COUNCIL OF FOREIGN AND COMMUNITY 
RELATIONS IN MAY.  CRAIG ADDED THAT AS FAR AS SURINAME- 
UNITED STATES RELATIONS ARE CONCERNED, HIS GOVERNMENT LOOKS 
    FORWARD TO TAPPING INTO PRESIDENT BUSH\'S FIVE-YEAR 15 
BILLION USD HIV/AIDS EMERGENCY RELIEF PLAN. 
 
5. (U) COMMENT.  FOR ISOLATED SURINAME, THE SUMMIT PROVIDED 
A RARE OPPORTUNITY FOR PRESIDENT VENETIAAN TO RUB ELBOWS 
WITH OTHER POLITICAL LEADERS IN THE AMERICAS.  IT ALSO 
RESULTED IN AN EXCELLENT PHOTO OP.  SEVERAL LOCAL DAILIES 
PROMINENTLY DISPLAYED ON THEIR FRONT PAGES THE SUMMIT\'S 
FAMILY PHOTO, WHICH FEATURED VENETIAAN PLACED BEHIND 
PRESIDENT BUSH.  END COMMENT. 
 
BARNES 
 
NNNN 


"
"13729","2/4/2004 17:07","04PARAMARIBO97","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","04REFSTATE19842","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000097 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR: MSEIBEL, AND FOR WHA/ESPC: KURS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, KTIA, NS 
SUBJECT: THE 17TH FTAA TRADE NEGOTIATION COMMITTEE MEETING, 
PUEBLA, MEXICO, FEB 3-6 
 
REF STATE 19842 
 
PER REFTEL REQUEST, ON JANUARY 30, THE EMBASSY FORWARDED THE 
US POSITION ON FTAA NEGOTIATIONS AT THE 17TH FTAA TRADE 
NEGOTIATIONS COMMITTEE MEETING IN PUEBLA, MEXICO TO EARL 
SABAJO, THE MINISTRY OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY\'S FTAA 
COORDINATOR.  SABAJO TOLD THE EMBASSY THAT HE WOULD ATTEND 
THE PUEBLA MEETING ON BEHALF OF THE GOS.  SABAJO HAD NO 
IMMEDIATE RESPONSE REGARDING THE US POSITION BUT SAID THAT 
HE WOULD TAKE IT INTO CONSIDERATION. 
BARNES 
 
NNNN 

 
 
 
v1.6.3 
"
"13750","2/5/2004 13:31","04PARAMARIBO98","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","04GEORGETOWN91","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000098 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, MASS, MARR, KPAO, NS 
SUBJECT: CST GENTIAN COMPLETES OUTSTANDING TRAINING AND 
PUBLIC DIPLOMACY VISIT TO SURINAME 
 
REF: GEORGETOWN 91 
 
1.  FOLLOWING ITS SUCCESSFUL VISIT TO GUYANA (REFTEL), CST 
GENTIAN SAILED INTO PARAMARIBO JANUARY 21 AND COMPLETED A 
HIGHLY PRAISED PROGRAM OF TRAINING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS.  THE 
AMBASSADOR MET THE GENTIAN AT SEA ON A SURINAMESE PILOT 
VESSEL AND SAILED INTO PORT WITH THE GENTIAN\'S CREW TO BEGIN 
THE VISIT.  THE AMBASSADOR ALSO HOSTED A PORT-SIDE RECEPTION 
JANUARY 24 THAT WAS WELL ATTENDED BY MEMBERS OF THE LOCAL 
ARMED FORCES, PROMINENT BUSINESSMEN, AND LEADING POLITICIANS. 
 THE GENTIAN GARNERED EXCELLENT AND EXTENSIVE MEDIA COVERAGE, 
INCLUDING AN IN-DEPTH INTERVIEW WITH THE SURINAMESE CREW 
MEMBER THAT APPEARED IN A LOCAL WEEKLY. 
 
2.  DURING THE GENTIAN\'S VISIT, 35 SURINAMESE SAILORS, SIX 
MEMBERS OF SURINAME\'S PORT SECURITY DEPARTMENT AND FIVE 
MEMBERS OF SURINAME\'S MARITIME AUTHORITY\'S EMERGENCY REACTION 
TEAM RECEIVED 20 HOURS OF TRAINING IN FIVE CORE AREAS: 
 
-- MARITIME LAW ENFORCEMENT; 
-- FIRE FIGHTING AND AREA DAMAGE CONTROL; 
-- NAVIGATIONAL RADAR/GPS; 
-- BASIC LIFE SAVER MEDICAL ASSISTANCE; 
-- MAINTENANCE ASSISTANCE. 
 
FOLLOWING THE TRAINING, THE CST GENTIAN DONATED USD 23,800 
WORTH OF EQUIPMENT TO THE SURINAMESE NAVY. 
 
3.  IN AN LAST-MINUTE TWIST, THE GENTIAN AGREED TO TRANSPORT 
THREE SURINAMESE SAILORS TO TRINIDAD TO PARTICIPATE IN THE 
CARIBBEAN ROUND-UP.  THE DECISION WAS MADE TO BILLET THE 
THREE SAILORS ON THE GENTIAN WHEN IT BECAME APPARENT THAT THE 
    GENTIAN\'S ENGINEERING STAFF WAS UNABLE TO REPAIR ENGINE 
COMPUTER PROBLEMS ON A SURINAMESE PATROL BOAT THAT WAS TO 
TAKE PART IN THE ROUND-UP.  SURINAMESE AUTHORITIES EXPRESSED 
DEEP APPRECIATION FOR THE OPPORTUNITY GIVEN THEIR SAILORS TO 
SAIL ABOARD THE GENTIAN TO TRINIDAD, ENABLING SURINAME TO 
PARTICIPATE IN THE CARIBBEAN ROUND-UP. 
 
4. COMMENT.  THE GENTIAN VISIT UNDERLINED THE IMPORTANCE OF 
THE CST PROGRAM TO SURINAME.  IN ADDITION TO THE OUTSTANDING 
TRAINING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS VALUES IT OFFERED, THE 
GENTIAN\'S VISIT HELPED ADVANCE SEVERAL EMBASSY PRIORITIES. 
IN PARTICULAR, THE VISIT CAME AT A TIME WHEN SURINAME IS 
MOVING TOWARD ESTABLISHING A COAST GUARD THAT WOULD TAKE OVER 
MANY OF THE MISSIONS CURRENTLY ASSIGNED TO ITS SMALL NAVY, A 
MOVE THAT THE US AND THE NETHERLANDS HAVE ADVOCATED FOR 
SEVERAL YEARS.  POST EXPRESSES ITS APPRECIATION FOR THE CST 
PROGRAM AND REGISTERS ITS STRONG SUPPORT FOR ITS CONTINUATION. 
BARNES 
 
NNNN 
            2004PARAMA00098 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
 
v1.6.3 
"
"13755","2/5/2004 19:39","04PARAMARIBO104","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE333935","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARAMARIBO 000104 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, PGOV, ELAB, KDEM, KPAO, KSEP 
SUBJECT: US HUMAN RIGHTS STRATEGY FOR SURINAME 
 
REF: 03 STATE 333935 
 
THE FOLLOWING IS POST\'S SUBMISSION FOR THE REPORT ON U.S. 
HUMAN RIGHTS STRATEGY. 
 
BEGIN TEXT. 
 
THE SURINAMESE GOVERNMENT, HEADED BY PRESIDENT RONALD 
VENETIAAN, IS STILL IN THE PROCESS OF CONSOLIDATING 
DEMOCRATIC, CONSTITUTIONAL RULE IN THE COUNTRY.  SURINAME 
HELD GENERALLY FREE AND FAIR ELECTIONS IN MAY 2000.  THE 
    GOVERNMENT GENERALLY RESPECTED THE HUMAN RIGHTS OF ITS 
CITIZENS; HOWEVER, THERE WERE PROBLEMS IN SOME AREAS. POLICE 
MISTREATED DETAINEES, SPECIFICALLY AT THE TIME OF ARREST, 
AND LOCAL DETENTION FACILITIES REMAINED OVERCROWDED.  THE 
JUDICIARY SUFFERED FROM INEFFECTIVENESS AND A HUGE CASE 
BACKLOG DUE TO THE SHORTAGE OF JUDGES, RESULTING IN LENGTHY 
PRETRIAL DETENTION.  MEDIA SELF-CENSORSHIP CONTINUED. 
SOCIETAL DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN, MINORITIES, AND 
TRIBAL PERSONS PERSISTED.  VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN CONTINUED, 
AND WHILE THE GOVERNMENT TOOK STEPS TO COMBAT TRAFFICKING IN 
PERSONS, TRAFFICKING IN WOMEN REMAINED A PROBLEM. 
 
U.S. OFFICIALS ROUTINELY HIGHLIGHT PUBLICLY THE NEED FOR 
IMPROVEMENTS IN HUMAN RIGHTS CONDITIONS.  THE AMBASSADOR AND 
OTHER OFFICERS OF THE U.S. MISSION ALSO WORK PRIVATELY WITH 
SURINAMESE OFFICIALS, NGOS, AND OTHER ORGANIZATIONS TO 
IDENTIFY AREAS OF PARTICULAR CONCERN AND ENCOURAGE SYSTEMIC 
REFORMS. 
 
BECAUSE MANY OF SURINAME\'S LAW ENFORCEMENT INSTITUTIONS 
CONTINUE TO FACE SIGNIFICANT IMPEDIMENTS, THE EMBASSY 
FOCUSED ITS HUMAN RIGHTS AND DEMOCRACY EFFORTS IN THAT 
SECTOR.  HOWEVER, THE EMBASSY ADDRESSED OTHER HUMAN RIGHTS 
ISSUES IN AREAS SUCH AS HIV/AIDS, HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND 
MICRO-ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT. 
 
TO FOSTER MORE PROFESSIONAL SECURITY FORCES AND TO PROMOTE 
RESPECT FOR THE RULE OF LAW, THE EMBASSY INVITED EXPERTS 
FROM THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATIONS, CUSTOMS, AND 
OTHER U.S. GOVERNMENT AGENCIES TO TRAIN LOCAL LAW 
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS (POLICE, CUSTOMS OFFICIALS, 
    PROSECUTORS, AND JUDGES) ON ANTI-CORRUPTION EFFORTS, JOINT 
POLICE INTELLIGENCE, AND UNDERCOVER TECHNIQUES.  THE EMBASSY 
ASSISTED SURINAME IN ESTABLISHING A FINANCIAL INTELLIGENCE 
UNIT, WHICH ALSO RECEIVED USG FUNDING REGIONALLY THROUGH THE 
CARIBBEAN ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING PROGRAM.  IN ADDITION, THE 
EMBASSY SENT LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS FOR TRAINING IN THE 
U.S. AND ABROAD AND TWO JUDGES TO THE U.S. TO MEET WITH 
COUNTERPARTS AND OBSERVE THE JUDICIAL PROCESS. 
 
THE DEFENSE ATTACHE OFFICE (DAO) CONDUCTED SEVERAL 
ACTIVITIES THROUGHOUT THE YEAR THAT PROMOTED 
PROFESSIONALIZATION OF THE MILITARY AND EFFORTS BY THE 
SURINAMESE ARMED FORCES TO ACTIVELY ENHANCE THE WELFARE OF 
SURINAMESE CITIZENS.  THE OFFICE SENT FOR TRAINING SEVENTEEN 
MILITARY OFFICERS AND NON-COMMISSIONED OFFICERS THROUGH THE 
INTERNATIONAL MILITARY AND EDUCATION TRAINING (IMET) PROGRAM 
IN AREAS, SUCH AS LAW AND BORDER PATROL, WHO WERE VETTED BY 
THE MINISTRY OF DEFENSE AND VARIOUS SECTIONS OF THE EMBASSY 
IN COMPLIANCE WITH THE LEAHY AMENDMENT.  MOREOVER, DAO 
PROVIDED FIRST RESPONDER MEDICAL AND A FOLLOW-UP ADVANCED 
EMERGENCY TECHNICIAN TRAINING TO MILITARY AND CIVILIAN 
PERSONNEL IN COUNTRY.  DAO DONATED 250,000 USD FOR THE 
ESTABLISHMENT OF A NATIONAL EMERGENCY OPERATIONS CENTER AND 
TWO DISASTER WAREHOUSES AND PROVIDED 500,000 USD IN MEDICAL 
SUPPLIES TO THE MILITARY.  IN ADDITION, DAO, WITH THE 
ASSISTANCE OF THE SURINAME ARMED FORCES, CARRIED OUT A 
MEDICAL READINESS EXERCISE THAT PROVIDED BASIC MEDICAL, NON- 
SURGICAL CARE TO 6,000 SURINAMERS. 
 
TO PROMOTE THE STUDY OF HUMAN RIGHTS IN SURINAME, THE 
EMBASSY PLACED A FULBRIGHT SENIOR SPECIALIST AT THE LOCAL 
    UNIVERSITY, ANTON DE KOM, TO TEACH A HUMAN RIGHTS COURSE TO 
UNDERGRADUATE AND GRADUATE STUDENTS, INCLUDING POLICYMAKERS. 
ANOTHER FULBRIGHT SPECIALIST PLACED AT THE UNIVERSITY TAUGHT 
AROUND 20 SEASONED PROFESSORS STUDENT-CENTERED INSTRUCTIONAL 
TECHNIQUES TO FOSTER CRITICAL THINKING RATHER THAN ROTE 
MEMORIZATION.  THE SUCCESS OF THAT PROGRAM LED A LOCAL 
INSTITUTE TO PRESENT A COURSE FOR TEACHERS-IN-TRAINING TO 
LEARN THESE NEW TECHNIQUES.  IN 2003, THE EMBASSY SENT TWO 
PARTICIPANTS TO INTERNATIONAL VISITORS PROGRAMS ON 
\"MULTICULTURALISM\" AND \"WOMEN IN BUSINESS\" AND HELD AN E- 
COMMERCE WORKSHOP FOR LOCAL BUSINESSWOMEN.  AROUND 60 PEACE 
CORPS VOLUNTEERS PROMOTED HUMAN RIGHTS IN GENERAL BY WORKING 
NATION-WIDE ON EDUCATION, HEALTH, AND MICRO-ECONOMIC 
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS WITH MARGINALIZED GROUPS. 
 
 
THE EMBASSY LOBBIED THE GOVERNMENT TO PAY GREATER ATTENTION 
TO HIV/AIDS.  USAID PROVIDED 425,218 USD TO FUND VARIOUS 
ACTIVITIES IN COUNTRY TO ASSIST THE GOVERNMENT AND LOCAL 
NGOS TO FIGHT DISCRIMINATION TOWARD PERSONS INFECTED WITH 
HIV/AIDS, TO PROVIDE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE (VOLUNTARY 
COUNSELING AND TESTING TRAINING, SURVEILLANCE METHODS), AND 
TO PROMOTE INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY BUILDING.  THE EMBASSY 
 
PARAMARIBO 00000104  002 OF 002 
 
 PUBLIC 
AWARENESS CAMPAIGNS BY FOUR LOCAL NGOS AND TO CO-SPONSOR 
NATIONAL CONSULTATIONS ON HIV/AIDS, A PREREQUISITE FOR THE 
COMPLETION OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGIC PLAN TO COMBAT 
HIV/AIDS.  WITH THE ASSISTANCE OF THE EMBASSY AND OTHER 
STAKEHOLDERS, THE NATIONAL HIV/AIDS PROGRAM COMPLETED THE 
NATIONAL STRATEGIC PLAN, WHICH SURINAME CAN USE TO 
STRENGTHEN ITS CASE TO OBTAIN FUNDS FROM THE GLOBAL FUND. 
PEACE CORPS CONTRIBUTED TO THESE EFFORTS BY ASSIGNING AT 
LEAST TEN VOLUNTEERS TO WORK PRIMARILY ON HIV/AIDS RELATED 
    PROJECTS.  IN ADDITION TO THESE EFFORTS, THE AMBASSADOR MET 
WITH SEVERAL GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS PRIVATELY TO RELAY HER 
CONCERNS ABOUT HIV/AIDS AND PENNED AN OP-ED ON THE NEED TO 
INCREASE EFFORTS AGAINST HIV/AIDS, WHICH RECEIVED FRONT-PAGE 
COVERAGE IN LOCAL DAILIES. 
 
THE EMBASSY ENCOURAGED THE GOVERNMENT TO ADDRESS HUMAN 
TRAFFICKING -- SURINAME WAS INITIALLY DEEMED A \"TIER 3\" AND 
LATER A \"TIER 2\" COUNTRY ON THE STATE DEPARTMENT\'S 
TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 2002 LIST.  AS A RESULT OF THIS 
PRESSURE, THE GOVERNMENT ESTABLISHED AN ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
COMMISSION COMPRISED OF VARIOUS MINISTRIES AND A LOCAL NGO 
HEADED BY THE MINISTRY OF JUSTICE AND POLICE TO STUDY 
TRAFFICKING.  IN ADDITION, THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR\'S OFFICE 
AND THE POLICE ESTABLISHED A REGISTRY OF ALL BROTHELS AND 
THEIR EMPLOYEES BY NATIONALITY.  THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR\'S 
OFFICE, IN COOPERATION WITH POLICE OFFICIALS, ALSO EXTENDED 
SERVICES PROVIDED TO VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE TO 
POSSIBLE TRAFFICKED VICTIMS AND IN MAY ESTABLISHED A 
\"SPECIAL VICTIMS\' UNIT\" AND A TELEPHONE HOTLINE TO HANDLE 
ALL CASES FROM THE COMMERCIAL SEX INDUSTRY.  THE MISSION 
SECURED 92,000 USD FOR A TWO-YEAR PROGRAM TO BE CARRIED OUT 
BY THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE OFFICE FOR PROSECUTORIAL 
DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE TRAINING TO ASSIST SURINAME IN ITS 
FIGHT AGAINST HUMAN TRAFFICKING. 
 
END TEXT. 
 
BARNES 
 
 

 
NNNN 
            2004PARAMA00104 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
 
v1.6.3 
"
"13866","2/11/2004 10:14","04PARAMARIBO116","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000116 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: N/A 
TAGS: KNNP, TRGY, ENRG, KSTC, PARM, OPDC, PREL, NS, IAEA 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE ON MAKING A POLITICAL COMMITMENT TO 
FOLLOWING THE IAEA CODE OF CONDUCT GUIDANCE DELIVERED 
 
 
    REF: SECSTATE 22020 
 
ON FEBRUARY 4 THE EMBASSY DELIVERED REFTEL DEMARCHE CALLING 
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF SURINAME TO MAKE A POLITICAL 
COMMITMENT TO THE GUIDANCE CONTAINED IN THE IAEA CODE OF 
CONDUCT TO JEANELLE VAN GLAANENWEYGEL, THE HEAD OF THE 
MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION 
DIVISION.  THE EMBASSY LATER DELIVERED A LETTER FROM 
SECRETARY OF STATE COLIN POWELL TO FOREIGN MINISTER MARIE 
 
SIPDIS 
LEVENS ON THE MATTER.  VAN GLAANENWEYGEL PROMISED TO NOTIFY 
THE EMBASSY OF SURINAME\'S PERSPECTIVE ON THE IAEA CODE OF 
CONDUCT AT A LATER DATE. 
 
BARNES 
 
NNNN 
            2004PARAMA00116 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
 
v1.6.3 
"
"13880","2/11/2004 13:58","04PARAMARIBO117","Embassy Paramaribo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L  PARAMARIBO 000117 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: (##) 
TAGS: PREL, MARR, NS, Article 98 
SUBJECT: MILITARY OFFICER VOICES PUBLIC SUPPORT FOR AN 
ARTICLE 98 AGREEMENT 
 
 
CLASSIFIED BY AMBASSADOR BARNES FOR REASON 1.5 B AND D. 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  (C) Summary.  During a February 7 press \"Information 
Day\" hosted by Suriname\'s National Army, a military 
officer, Major Goerdeyal, called on the Surinamese 
Government to sign an Article 98 agreement with the United 
States or face losing US military assistance.  Goerdeyal 
declared that the days of the military coup were over and 
that every member of the Surinamese Armed Forces from the 
first day of recruit training is made to understand that 
the armed forces serve under the civilian leadership of the 
country.  He also announced that the GOS was implementing a 
plan to reinstate a national service program in response to 
the military threat posed by Guyana.  His remarks were 
widely reported by journalists.  Surinamese President 
Venetiaan was reportedly extremely irritated by Goerdeyal\'s 
public comments, so much so that he appended his speech to 
the annual Diplomatic New Year\'s luncheon to remind the 
military that the Surinamese Army is subordinate to the 
civil authorities.  However well intentioned, Goerdeyal\'s 
statements have made our achieving an Article 98 agreement 
with Suriname all the more difficult.  End Summary. 
 
ARTICLE 98 
---------- 
 
2.  (U) During a specially organized \"Information Day\" for 
the press February 6, Major Pertapsingh Goerdeyal, the head 
of Suriname\'s Armed Forces (SAF) training and operations 
division, voiced strong support for an Article 98 agreement 
between Suriname and the United States.  According to local 
media reports, Goerdeyal warned that Suriname would lose 
all the assistance that it currently received from SOUTHCOM 
if it joined the ICC but failed to sign an Article 98 
agreement.  Noting that SOUTHCOM was currently the SAF\'s 
largest donor and the only entity that trained Surinamese 
military personnel abroad, he stressed it was in Suriname\'s 
\"highest interest\" that cooperation between SOUTHCOM and 
the SAF continue.  Goerdeyal added that it was unclear what 
the GOS decision on Article 98 would be but that time was 
running out.  The signing of an Article 98 agreement will 
be discussed, Goerdeyal said, when Minister of Defense 
Assen meets with senior SOUTHCOM officials at SOUTHCOM 
headquarters in less than two weeks. 
 
3.  (U) Goerdayal told the press, \"the US military attache 
has told us that, if Suriname signs up to the ICC but not 
to an Article 98 agreement, then within 24 hours he must 
close his office, depart and all projects will stop.\" 
(Comment:  No such statement has ever been made by the 
DATT\'s office in Paramaribo.  End Comment.)  Goerdeyal 
added, however, that, as a clear incentive, SOUTHCOM has 
made available a USD 1.6 project for the SAF that Suriname 
can claim if it signs an Article 98 agreement.  He 
explained that Guyana was already making use of a similar 
incentive project.  Having already signed an Article 98 
agreement, Guyana enjoys generous support from SOUTHCOM, he 
claimed.  (Comment.  Again, sources for these statements 
are unknown.  End Comment.) 
 
4.  (U) Building the case for an agreement, Goerdeyal 
highlighted the joint activities that will be carried out 
by SOUTHCOM and the SAF this year, including: 
 
--  The SAF and SOUTHCOM will participate in two Medical 
Readiness Exercises, one in April and the other in 
May, which would result in free medical treatment to 
12,000 needy Surinamers. 
 
--  The SAF will receive training via the International 
Military and Education Training (IMET) Programs as 
well as a first responder medical training to help the 
SAF fulfill its newly extended mandate, including 
emergency assistance coordination. 
-- -Suriname will participate in a Joint Command Exercise 
Training (JCET).  During an October 2003 JCET, fifty 
military personnel and ten police officers received 
special anti-terrorism training.  Goerdeyal deemed 
JCETs particularly useful since they provide 
Surinamese military personnel with the newest tactical 
and technical tools. 
 
 
--  SOUTHCOM has made available 400,000 USD in 
humanitarian assistance through the Humanitarian 
Assistance Program (HAP). 
 
5.  (U) In addition, Goerdeyal announced that as a sign of 
solidarity between the two nations, SOUTHCOM had invited 
Suriname to participate in the Trade Winds Exercise, which 
will take place April 7-17, 2004, in the Dominican 
Republic. 
 
6.  (U) To counter concerns that Americans accused of 
committing a war crime might somehow escape justice via an 
Article 98 agreement, Goerdeyal laid out the legal 
framework underlying such an agreement.  He explained that 
under an Article 98 agreement, American citizens, including 
military personnel, would be tried either in the country 
where the crime allegedly occurred or in the United States 
but not in the International Criminal Court (ICC). 
 
7.  (U)  In other matters, Goerdeyal stated: 
 
--   The days of military coups in Suriname have passed for 
good.  \"The chance that the military would ever take 
over via a coup is small.\"  All recruits and all 
members of the armed forces learn from day one that 
they serve under the civilian leadership of the 
country. 
 
-- The Surinamese Army recently received applications 
from 1,700 young men and women for 200 positions 
within the Armed Forces. 
 
-- The Surinamese Government is implementing a plan to 
reinstate national service.  Among other reasons, this 
is being done in response to the military threat posed 
by Guyana. 
 
DISAVOWAL 
--------- 
 
8. (C) Goerdeyal\'s comments reportedly infuriated 
Surinamese President Venetiaan, who called in his top 
military officials over the weekend to file a report on 
Geordeyal\'s remarks, which he reportedly characterized as 
military leadership meddling in political matters.  Both 
Ministry of Defense Chief of Staff Justice Hew a Kie and 
Suriname Armed Forces CHOD Ernest Mercuur told the Embassy 
privately on February 9 that, in their reports to 
Venetiaan, they disavowed Goerdeyal\'s remarks.  They 
stressed that the SAF did not seek to publicly pressure the 
GOS to decide one way or the other on signing an Article 98 
agreement.  (Comment.  Although they have consistently made 
clear to DATT that they favor such an agreement, they 
recognized it as a political decision.  End Comment.) They 
both regretted Goerdeyal\'s statement about \"coups\" as 
unnecessary and unfortunate.  They also rejected his 
assertion that there was any plan in place to resurrect a 
national service program, although they admitted that 
Minister of Defense Assen had stated that such a plan might 
be developed sometime this year.  But, they stressed, the 
national service plan has nothing to do with any supposed 
military threats from Guyana. 
 
VENETIAAN 
--------- 
 
10. (U) For his part, President Venetiaan added a comment 
to the end of his prepared speech on the occasion of his 
New Year\'s luncheon for the Diplomatic Corps February 9, in 
which he stated: \"We feel a need to stress the importance 
of democracy in Suriname and in particular the rule that in 
Suriname the army is subordinated to the civil authority in 
the country.  This should not be jeopardized in any way.\" 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
11.  (C) The sources for many of Geordeyal\'s Article 98 
declarations, including his claims of promised SOUTHCOM 
support, are unclear.  The swift reaction by Suriname\'s 
President to Goerdeyal\'s worrisome statements demonstrates 
the heightened sensitivity to any overstepping of bounds by 
the military given Suriname\'s muddied past with military 
regimes.  Despite Goerdeyal\'s best intentions, the 
 
 
statements may have adverse effects on our continuing 
efforts to secure an Article 98 agreement with Suriname. 
END COMMENT. 
 
BARNES 
 
 
NNNN 
 
            2004PARAMA00117 - Classification: CONFIDENTIAL 
 
 
 
v1.6.3 
"
"13903","2/12/2004 10:36","04PARAMARIBO121","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","04PARAMARIBO35","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000121 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR: MSEIBEL, FOR EB: OES: DWILBUR, 
AND FOR USAID: MBLACKWOOD 
BRASILIA FOR ENVIRONMENTAL HUB 
SAN JOSE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL HUB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV, PREL, NS 
SUBJECT: SURINAME: WHITE WATER TO BLUE WATER PARTNERSHIP 
CONFERENCE DELEGATION 
 
REF: (A) STATE 1130, (B) PARAMARIBO 35 
 
1.  PER REF B, EMBASSY PARAMARIBO IS PLEASED TO CONFIRM THAT 
SURINAME WILL ATTEND THE MARCH 21-26 WHITE WATER TO BLUE 
WATER PARTNERSHIP CONFERENCE (WW2BW) IN MIAMI (REF A). 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE PERMANENT SECRETARY JASWANT SAHTOE 
HAS CONFIRMED THE FIVE-PERSON SURINAMESE DELEGATION WILL BE 
COMPRISED OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS: 
 
-    JAINOEL ABDUL, DIRECTOR OF THE MINISTRY OF NATURAL 
  RESOURCES IN CHARGE OF ENERGY, MINING AND WATER; 
-    GERRIT BREINBURG, MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE DIRECTOR OF 
  AGRICULTURE PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT; 
-    MARGRET KEREKHOFFS-ZERP, ENVIRONMENT POLICY OFFICER FROM 
THE MINISTRY OF LABOR, TECHNOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT, AND 
ENVIRONMENT; 
-    RIGILLO BANSIE, OFFICER AT THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE\'S 
  FISHERY STATISTICS AND RESEARCH DIVISION; AND 
-    MICHEL AMOFO, MANAGER FROM THE MARITIME AUTHORITY 
SURINAME. 
 
2. THE POINT OF CONTACT FOR THIS DELEGATION IS GERRIT 
BREINBURG, AGRICULTURE MINISTRY, LETITIA VRIESDELN, 
PARAMARIBO; PHONE NUMBER +597 470-301; EMAIL ADDRESS: 
DIRLVV@SR.NET. 
 
3.  THE EMBASSY NOTES THAT AGRICULTURE MINISTRY PERMANENT 
    SECRETARY JASWANT SAHTOE HAS REQUESTED FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE 
FOR THE SURINAMESE DELEGATION TO ATTEND THE MIAMI WW2BW 
CONFERENCE. 
 
BARNES 
 
NNNN 
            2004PARAMA00121 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
 
v1.6.3 
"
"13915","2/12/2004 14:43","04PARAMARIBO126","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","03PARAMARIBO796","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000126 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR - MSEIBEL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, ETRD, PREL, EMIN, ETRD, NS 
SUBJECT: LOCAL PUNDIT\'S CRITICISM OF FTAA GETS BIG MEDIA 
    ATTENTION IN SURINAME 
 
REF: 03 PARAMARIBO 796 
 
1. SUMMARY: A JANUARY 19 EDITORIAL BY LOCAL PUNDIT NICO 
WAAGMEESTER CRITICIZED THE FREE TRADE AREA OF THE AMERICAS 
(FTAA) PROCESS FOR STRAYING FROM THE ORIGINAL IDEALS OF 
DEVELOPMENT, DEMOCRACY, FREE TRADE, AND SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT.  WAAGMEESTER, A MEMBER OF THE CONSERVATIVE 
EMPLOYERS\' UNION (VSB), LAMENTED THE SHIFT FROM A FOCUS ON 
POVERTY REDUCTION TO ONE OF MARKET ACCESS.  DESPITE 
PRESIDENT RONALD VENETIAAN\'S ATTEMPT TO GARNER SUPPORT FOR 
FTAA IN HIS NOVEMBER 25 INDEPENDENCE SPEECH IN WHICH HE 
CALLED ON SURINAMERS TO SEIZE THE OPPORTUNITIES THAT THE 
FTAA AND THE CARIBBEAN SINGLE MARKET ECONOMY (CSME) PRESENT, 
ANTI-FTAA RHETORIC CONTINUES TO GET GREAT PLAY IN THE LOCAL 
MEDIA.  (SEE REFTEL.)  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
FTAA NO LONGER FOCUSED ON POVERTY REDUCTION 
OR DEVELOPMENT, SAYS LOCAL PUNDIT 
------------------------------------------- 
 
2. IN A JANUARY 19 EDITION OF LOCAL DAILY DE WARE TIJD, NICO 
WAAGMEESTER, A MEMBER OF THE CONSERVATIVE EMPLOYERS\' UNION 
(VSB), PUBLISHED AN EDITORIAL CRITICAL OF THE FREE TRADE OF 
AREA OF THE AMERICAS (FTAA) NEGOTIATIONS PROCESS AND ITS 
\"VISION.\"  EXTENSIVELY CITING SECRETARY GENERAL OF THE 
CARICOM BYRON BLAKE AT THE NOVEMBER 8-10, 2003, CARIBBEAN 
CENTRAL AMERICAN ACTION (CCAA) HELD IN MIAMI, WAAGMEESTER 
PAINTED THE FTAA NEGOTIATION\'S PROCESS AS ONE THAT HAD BEEN 
    HIJACKED FROM ITS 1993 VISION FOCUSED ON PARTNERSHIP FOR 
DEVELOPMENT, DEMOCRACY, FREE TRADE, AND ENVIRONMENT TO ONE 
THAT FOCUSED ON COOPERATION FOR THE BENEFIT OF A FEW 
COUNTRIES.  THE 2003 VISION, HE SAID, HAS BECOME A UNION IN 
WHICH RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS ARE BASED ON THE INTERESTS OF 
INDIVIDUAL MEMBER STATES, MARKET ACCESS, AND MONEY 
LAUNDERING.  THE FINAL AGREEMENT, WAAGMEESTER WROTE, WILL BE 
FORGED DESPITE THE ABILITY OF INDIVIDUAL COUNTRIES TO 
NEGOTIATE ON AN EVEN FOOTING WITH LARGER COUNTRIES AND 
REGARDLESS OF WHETHER MEMBER STATES CAN FULFILL ITS 
OBLIGATIONS.  WITH SMALL ECONOMIES, LIKE SURINAME\'S, NOT 
READY TO OPEN THEIR MARKETS TO STIFF FOREIGN COMPETITION, 
FTAA\'S WINNERS WILL BE BIG ECONOMIES, WAAGMEESTER CONCLUDED, 
AT THE EXPENSE OF SMALL, UNDERDEVELOPED ECONOMIES. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
3. IN HIS NOVEMBER 25, 2003, INDEPENDENCE-DAY SPEECH, 
PRESIDENT RONALD VENETIAAN PRONOUNCED HIS SUPPORT FOR FTAA 
AND CALLED ON SURINAMERS TO SEIZE THE OPPORTUNITIES 
PRESENTED BY FTAA AND THE CARIBBEAN SINGLE MARKET ECONOMY 
(CSME).  LOCAL PUNDITS LIKE WAAGMEESTER, HOWEVER, CONTINUE 
TO GET GREAT PRESS COVERAGE FOR ANTI-FTAA RHETORIC, 
REFLECTING THE GENERAL ANXIETY AMONG SURINAMERS OVER HOW 
THEY WILL FARE WHEN FTAA IS IMPLEMENTED.  (SEE REFTEL.) 
SURINAMERS CONTINUE TO EXPRESS THE FEAR THAT SURINAMESE 
BUSINESSES WILL BE WIPED OUT BY AGGRESSIVE FOREIGN 
COMPETITION -- AND FOR GOOD REASONS.  MANY SURINAMESE 
BUSINESSES LACK BASIC SKILLS TO COMPETE GLOBALLY, SUCH AS 
    MARKETING SAVVY, MANAGERIAL SKILLS, OR KNOWLEDGE OF THE 
STRATEGIC PLANNING PROCESS.  AS LONG AS SURINAMERS SEE 
LITTLE GAIN FROM FTAA, WAAGMEESTER\'S VIEW WILL PERSIST THAT 
FTAA\'S WINNERS WILL BE LARGE ECONOMIES AT THE EXPENSE OF 
SMALL ECONOMIES.  END COMMENT. 
 
BARNES 
 
NNNN 
            2004PARAMA00126 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
 
v1.6.3 
"
"13924","2/12/2004 18:47","04PARAMARIBO128","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000128 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR: MARK SEIBEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, EAGR, NS 
SUBJECT: SURINAME BANS IMPORT OF US CHICKEN 
 
 
    ON FEBRUARY 12, DIRECTOR OF ANIMAL PRODUCTION AND HEALTH IN 
THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, LIVESTOCK, AND FISHERIES EDMUND 
ROZENBLAD ANNOUNCED IN THE DAILY SURINAME TIMES THAT 
SURINAME HAS BANNED THE IMPORT OF US CHICKEN UNTIL FURTHER 
NOTICE.  ROZENBLAD INFORMED THE EMBASSY THAT THE BAN IS A 
PRECAUTIONARY MEASURE.  HE EXPLAINED THAT THE AVIAN FLU 
OUTBREAK IN DELAWARE COULD EXPAND TO SOUTHERN STATES LIKE 
GEORGIA OR FLORIDA, WHICH PRODUCE MOST OF THE CHICKEN THAT 
SURINAME IMPORTS.  ROZENBLAD FURTHER STATED THAT CHICKEN 
IMPORTERS ALREADY HAVE BEEN INFORMED ABOUT THE BAN. 
SHIPMENTS FROM THE US THAT ARE ALREADY ON THEIR WAY WILL BE 
ACCEPTED SINCE THESE CONTAINERS WERE SHIPPED BEFORE THE 
OUTBREAK OF THE AVIAN FLU. 
 
BARNES 
 
NNNN 
            2004PARAMA00128 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
 
v1.6.3 
"
"14135","2/20/2004 15:58","04PARAMARIBO157","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE27335","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000157 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR -- MSEIBEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, AORC, PREL, NS, WHO 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE ON WHO GLOBAL STRATEGY ON DIET, 
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY, AND HEALTH DELIVERED 
 
REF: STATE 27335 
 
ON FEBRUARY 17, THE EMBASSY CONVEYED THE US STANCE ON THE 
WHO GLOBAL STRATEGY ON DIET, PHYSICAL ACTIVITY, AND HEALTH 
TO JEANELLE VAN GLAANENWEYGEL, THE HEAD OF THE INTERNATIONAL 
ORGANIZATIONS DEPARTMENT AT THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS, 
TO RINIA CODFRIED-KRANENBURG, THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH 
PERMANENT SECRETARY, AND TO SANDRA NANHOE, THE MINISTRY OF 
HEALTH\'S COORDINATOR FOR INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS.  NANHOE 
PROMISED TO INFORM THE EMBASSY OF SURINAME\'S RESPONSE AT A 
LATER DATE. 
 
BARNES 
 
NNNN 
            2004PARAMA00157 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
 
v1.6.3 
"
"14197","2/23/2004 19:20","04PARAMARIBO165","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE36977","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000165 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
C O R R E C T E D  COPY (CHANGING SUBJECT LINE) 
 
FOR WHA/CAR, S/S-S 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KDEM, VE, NS, OAS 
SUBJECT:  DEMARCHE TO OAS MEMBERS STATES 

REF:  STATE 36977 
 
1.  THE FOREIGN MINISTER IS OUT OF THE COUNTRY UNTIL 
MARCH 2, 2004.  AMBASSADOR MADE REFTEL POINTS TO THE 
ACTING PERMANENT SECRETARY OF THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN 
AFFAIRS, A FORMER AMBASSADOR TO VENEZUELA.  HE WAS AWARE 
OF THE FEBRUARY 13 OAS/TCC STATEMENT AND UNDERSTOOD OUR 
CONCERNS.  HE INDICATED THAT HE WOULD ADVISE SURINAME\'S 
REPRESENTATIVE TO THE OAS TO BE HELPFUL AND SUPPORTIVE 
IN ANY PERMANENT COUNCIL DISCUSSION.  WE DO NOT 
ANTICIPATE ANY PUBLIC EXPRESSIONS OF SUPPORT BY THE 
GOVERNMENT OF SURINAME FOR OAS/TCC EFFORTS IN VENEZUELA. 
 
 
BARNES 
 
NNNN 
            2004PARAMA00165 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
 
v1.6.3 
"
"14235","2/24/2004 19:15","04PARAMARIBO169","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  PARAMARIBO 000169 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR -- MSEIBEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ELAB, ECON, SOCI, NS 
SUBJECT: TEACHER UNION STRIKE FORCES CASH-STRAPPED 
SURINAMESE GOVT TO OFFER CIVIL SERVANT SALARY INCREASE 
 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  In the first case of labor unrest this year, the Union 
of High School Teachers (BVL) began a strike on February 17 
to protest the government\'s refusal to fulfill terms of a 
1998 agreement between the Wijdenbosch administration (1996- 
2000) and civil servants.  In response, Minister of 
Education Walter Sandriman denounced the strikes and 
announced legal action against the union to force the 
teachers to return to work.  However, BVL, buoyed by 
statements of support by other labor organizations, is 
promising to maintain its hardline position until the 
government accedes to its demands.  While the teachers\' 
strike is limited in scope at this time, it has already 
exacted a heavy price -- a civil servant salary increase -- 
which the cash-strapped government can not afford, and may 
touch off other strikes that may deteriorate Suriname\'s 
already battered economy.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
TEACHERS: GOVET RENEGED ON ITS PROMISES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
2. In the first case of labor unrest for the new year, the 
Union of High School Teachers (BVL) went on strike on 
February 17 after talks with the Ministry of Education over 
the granting of allowances reached a deadlock.  To exert 
pressure on the government, the union mobilized high school 
students to demonstrate at the Ministry of Education to the 
dismay of some members of the public.  On the following day, 
BVL led a peaceful street demonstration with about 140 
adults in front of the Vice President\'s office which is also 
the venue for the regularly scheduled Council of Ministers\' 
meeting which was then in session. 
 
3.  The disagreement between the government and BVL stemmed 
from the GOS\' refusal to follow through on a 1998 agreement 
brokered by the Wijdenbosch administration (1996-2000). 
Under this agreement, the government granted civil servants 
a clothing and a professional development allowance fixed at 
12 percent and 18 percent of 1998 salaries, respectively. 
In addition, it agreed to a clause allowing for a 
renegotiation of allowances contingent upon changes in the 
country\'s economic situation.  The Venetiaan administration 
insisted that it could not fulfill the terms of the 
agreement since it intends to terminate allowances once it 
fully restructures civil service salary scales.  At the same 
time, to pacify the BVL and other labor unions that may 
follow BVL\'s lead, the government granted one concession: a 
10 percent salary increase -- a 5 percent increase in March 
and another in September of this year.  However, this 
concession was not enough to satisfy the BVL, which 
maintained that the government still had to meet its 
obligations under the 1998 agreement.  (Note: The Federation 
of Teachers Unions (FOLS), whose chairman is a high-ranking 
member in the ruling New Front coalition\'s Suriname Labor 
Party (SPA), has accepted the government\'s 10 percent salary 
increase.  To quell the labor unrest, FOLS has offered to 
mediate between BVL and the Ministry of Education.  End 
Note). 
 
 
-------------------- 
THE GOVT\"S RESPONSE 
-------------------- 
 
4. During a February 17 press conference, Minister of 
Education Walter Sandriman condemned the teachers\' strike 
and announced legal actions against BVL.  Sandriman accused 
BVL chairman Wilgo Valies of exploiting the teachers and the 
students for the sake of his own political ambitions and 
disparaged the teachers for interrupting classes.  In 
addition, Sandriman vowed that he would go to the courts to 
force the striking teachers to resume their duties to uphold 
the \"no work, no pay\" principle reinstituted by the 
Venetiaan administration last year. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
TEACHERS: WE ARE MAINTAINING OUR GROUND 
---------------------------------------- 
 
5. In response to the Minister\'s statement, BVL chairman 
 
 
Wilgo Valies told the press that the union would not back 
down despite the threat of legal action against it.  Buoyed 
by statements of support from the labor federation de 
Moederbond, among others, a confident Valies asserted that 
he welcomed a court case and that he expects the judge to 
uphold the 1998 agreement and rule in favor of the union. 
In the meantime, he said, the teachers are prepared to 
continue the strike until the government meets their demand. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
6. The BVL strike is the first serious strike faced by the 
Venetiaan administration in some time.  Given Suriname\'s 
long tradition of labor activity and the role of teachers\' 
unions as lightning rods for labor unrests that have brought 
down previous governments, the BVL strike poses a legitimate 
threat to the Venetiaan administration, which can not afford 
to lose public support so close to the 2005 elections.  The 
strike has already exacted a heavy price since to pacify 
strikers, the administration offered a civil servant salary 
increase that will certainly have a negative impact on 
Suriname\'s already sputtering economy and may encourage 
other unions to seek similar pay raises. 
 
BARNES 
 
 
NNNN 
 
            2004PARAMA00169 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
 
v1.6.3 
"
"14331","2/26/2004 18:42","04PARAMARIBO175","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE35954","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000175 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR: MSEIBEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR, EC, EG, NS 
SUBJECT: ICAO\'S MEETING IN CAIRO: SURINAME REGRETS 
 
REF: STATE 35954 
 
1.  PER REFTEL REQUEST, ON FEBRUARY 20 THE EMBASSY DISCUSSED 
THE ICAO FACILITATION DIVISION (FAL/12) MEETING TO BE HELD IN 
    CAIRO FROM MARCH 22 TO APRIL 2, 2004, WITH SURINAME\'S CIVIL 
AVIATION AUTHORITY DIRECTOR VIVIAN HANENBERG.  HANENBERG 
RESPONDED THAT THE GOS WAS UNABLE TO SEND A DELEGATION TO 
ATTEND THE FAL/12 DIVISION MEETING. 
 
 
BARNES 
 
NNNN 
            2004PARAMA00175 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
 
v1.6.3 
"
"14377","2/27/2004 19:21","04PARAMARIBO183","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000183 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR - MSEIBEL, HAITI MONTORING TASK FORCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, MARR, NS 
SUBJECT: SURINAMESE MINISTER OF DEFENSE DISAVOWS PRESS 
REPORTS OF GOS WILLINGNESS TO ACCEPT HAITAIAN REFUGEES 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED - PLEASE HANDLE ACCORDINGLY. 
 
1.  (U)  SURINAMESE DEFENSE/ACTING FOREIGN MINISTER RONALD 
ASSEN DISAVOWED TO THE EMBASSY A HEADLINE STORY IN THE 
FEBRUARY 25 EDITION OF THE LOCAL DAILY DE WARE TIJD, IN 
WHICH HE REPORTEDLY DECLARED SURINAME\'S WILLINGNESS TO 
ACCEPT HAITIAN REFUGEES IF THE SITUATION IN HAITI 
DETERIORATES.  CONTRARY TO WHAT WAS REPORTED IN THE PRESS, 
ASSEN TOLD THE EMBASSY THAT HE HAD ONLY EXPRESSED SURINAME\'S 
WILLINGNESS TO CONSIDER A REQUEST BY THE INTERNATIONAL 
COMMUNITY TO ACCEPT HAITIAN REFUGEES.  (NOTE.  IN 1996, 
SURINAME PARTICIPATED IN THE US-LED OPERATION DISTANT HAVEN 
AND MADE RUDIMENTARY PREPARATIONS FOR A MAKESHIFT CAMP NEXT 
TO THE AYOKO MILITARY COMPOUND, LOCATED NEAR THE 
INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT, FOR AN INFLUX OF HAITIAN REFUGEES, 
WHICH NEVER MATERIALIZED.  TODAY THE \"REFUGEE CAMP\" AMOUNTS 
TO A GRASSY FIELD WITH CONCRETE SLABS, WHICH LACKS THE 
NECESSARY INFRASTRUCTURE TO SUPPORT A REFUGEE POPULATION. 
END NOTE.) 
 
2.  (SBU)  COMMENT.  THE MISINTERPRETATION BY THE PRESS OF 
MINISTER ASSEN\'S STATEMENTS CONCERNING SURINAME\'S 
WILLINGNESS TO ACCEPT HAITIAN REFUGEES IS YET ANOTHER 
EXAMPLE OF THE TOOLS OF THE TRADE EMPLOYED BY SURINAME\'S 
UNDERDEVELOPED PRESS.  THE STATEMENT BY ASSEN THAT SURINAME 
WOULD CONSIDER ANY REQUEST BY THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY TO 
TAKE IN HAITIAN REFUGEES IS A FAR CRY FROM THE ASSERTION 
    THAT SURINAME IS WILLING TO ACCEPT REFUGEES.  ASSEN AND 
OTHER GOS OFFICIALS CAN LIMIT SUCH PRESS GAFFES BY SPEAKING 
LESS FREELY WITH THE PRESS.  END COMMENT. 
 
3. (U) MINIMIZE CONSIDERED. 
 
BARNES 
 
NNNN 
            2004PARAMA00183 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
 
v1.6.3 
"
"14378","2/27/2004 19:24","04PARAMARIBO184","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","04REF2PARAMARIBO1169","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000184 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR -- MSEIBEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, ECON, EAGR, ETRD, NS 
SUBJECT: BRAZILIAN PRESIDENT TO VISIT SURINAME: TRADE, 
EXTRADITION TREATY TO TOP THE AGENDA 
 
REF 02 PARAMARIBO 1169 
 
1.  ACCORDING TO THE FEBRUARY 24 EDITION OF THE LOCAL DAILY 
\"DE WARE TIJD,\" SURINAMESE MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY 
MICHAEL JONG TJIEN FA ANNOUNCED DURING LOCAL CARNIVAL 
CELEBRATIONS ON FEBRUARY 20 A VISIT BY BRAZILIAN PRESIDENT 
LUS INCIO LULA DA SILVA TO SURINAME AT THE END OF 
MARCH/EARLY APRIL.  SOURCES AT THE MINISTRIES OF FOREIGN 
AFFAIRS AND TRADE AND INDUSTRY TOLD THE EMBASSY THAT 
SURINAME\'S MAIN GOAL IS TO SECURE A TRADE AGREEMENT WITH 
BRAZIL, WHICH WOULD GRANT IT GREATER ACCESS TO THE BRAZILIAN 
MARKET FOR RICE, WOOD, AND OTHER PRODUCTS.  THIS AGREEMENT 
IS ESPECIALLY NEEDED TO SHORE UP THE COUNTRY\'S TROUBLED RICE 
INDUSTRY.  A TEMPORARY MEASURE THAT ALLOWED SURINAME TO 
EXPORT RICE TO BRAZIL AT A REDUCED TARIFF RATE OF 4 PERCENT 
INSTEAD OF THE 11 PERCENT TARIFF LEVIED ON NON-MERCOSUR 
COUNTRIES EXPIRED IN DECEMBER 2003.  (SEE REFTEL FOR A FULL 
DISCUSSION OF SURINAME-BRAZIL RELATIONS.) 
 
2.  SURINAME WOULD ALSO LIKE TO CONTINUE DIALOGUE ON THE 
INTEGRATION OF REGIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE IN SOUTH AMERICA 
(IRISA) PROJECT, A TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATION PROJECT 
THAT WOULD LINK NORTHERN BRAZIL WITH THE GUIANAS.  THE 
PROJECT, WHICH HAS BEEN UNDER DISCUSSION FOR YEARS, HAS SEEN 
LITTLE PROGRESS TO DATE. 
 
3.  IN A FOLLOW-UP CONVERSATION WITH THE AMBASSADOR, RICARDO 
    LUIZ VIANA DE CARVALHO, THE RESIDENT BRAZILIAN AMBASSADOR, 
ADDED THAT IT IS EXPECTED TWO AGREEMENTS NEGOTIATED WITH 
SURINAME, ONE INVOLVING AN EXTRADITION TREATY AND ANOTHER 
INVOLVING THE REGISTRATION OF BRAZILIAN NATIONALS, WILL BE 
SIGNED DURING THE PRESIDENTIAL VISIT.  THE LATTER ACCORD 
WOULD GIVE THE ESTIMATED 40,000 BRAZILIANS HERE LEGAL BUT 
NOT PERMANENT RESIDENCE STATUS. 
 
4.  COMMENT.  FOR ISOLATED SURINAME, A VISIT BY BRAZILIAN 
PRESIDENT LULA IS A CELEBRATED EVENT SINCE VISITS BY HEADS 
OF STATE ARE FEW AND FAR BETWEEN.  THE LULA VISIT PROVIDES 
THE VENETIAAN ADMINISTRATION WITH AN OPPORTUNITY TO SECURE A 
TRADE AGREEMENT THAT GUARANTEES SURINAME GREATER ACCESS TO 
THE BRAZILIAN MARKET AHEAD OF THE UPCOMING 2005 ELECTIONS. 
A TRADE AGREEMENT WITH A POWERHOUSE LIKE BRAZIL WOULD BE 
TANGIBLE PROOF THAT THE RULING NEW FRONT COALITION IS 
ACTIVELY FORWARDING SURINAME\'S ECONOMIC/COMMERCIAL 
INTERESTS.  MORE BROADLY SPEAKING, A TRADE AGREEMENT, AN 
EXTRADITION TREATY, AND THE GRANTING OF LEGAL STATUS TO 
BRAZILIANS HERE WOULD BE MILESTONES FOR SURINAME-BRAZIL 
RELATIONS AS THEY WOULD SIGNAL GREATER COOPERATION BETWEEN 
THE TWO COUNTRIES ON CRITICAL POLICY ISSUES (TRADE, LAW 
ENFORCEMENT, AND IMMIGRATION).  END COMMENT. 
 
5.  MINIMIZE CONSIDERED. 
 
BARNES 
 
NNNN 
            2004PARAMA00184 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
 
v1.6.3 
"
"14474","3/2/2004 19:08","04PARAMARIBO187","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000187 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR: MSEIBEL 
USDOT FOR FOREST RAWLS III AND DAWN FLANAGAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR, EAID, PREL, NS 
SUBJECT: CIVAIR: SAFE SKIES FOR AFRICA, ADOPTING A REGIONAL 
    APPROACH TO AVIATION SAFETY OVERSIGHT 
 
REF: RAWLS-LAMPRON EMAIL 2-26-04 
 
1. IN RESPONSE TO THE FEBRUARY 26 REQUEST BY FAA DESK 
OFFICER FOR NIGERIA AND AFRICAN MULTILATERAL ISSUES FOREST 
RAWLS, THE EMBASSY PURCHASED ECONOMY-CLASS TICKETS FOR 
VIVIAN HANENBERG, DIRECTOR OF THE CIVIL AVIATION SAFETY 
AUTHORITY, TO ATTEND A MISSION IN SAN JOSE, COSTA RICA, FROM 
MARCH 8-12, 2004. 
 
2. HANENBERG\'S TRAVEL ITINERARY IS AS FOLLOWS: 
 
-DEPARTURE FROM ZANDERIJ INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT, PARAMARIBO, 
SURINAME AT 4:00 A.M. ON SATURDAY, MARCH 6, 2004, ON FLIGHT 
NUMBER 884 WITH BRITISH WEST INDIES AIRWAYS, ARRIVAL AT 4:25 
A.M. IN PIARCO AIRPORT, PORT OF SPAIN, TRINIDAD & TOBAGO. 
 
-DEPARTURE FROM PIARCO AIRPORT AT 9:15 A.M. ON SATURDAY, 
MARCH 6, 2004, ON FLIGHT NUMBER 484 WITH BRITISH WEST INDIES 
AIRWAYS, ARRIVAL AT 12:10 P.M. IN MIAMI INTERNATIONAL 
AIRPORT, MIAMI, FLORIDA. 
 
-DEPARTURE FROM MIAMI INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT AT 10:45 A.M. ON 
SUNDAY, MARCH 7, 2004, ON FLIGHT NUMBER 989 WITH AMERICAN 
AIRLINES, ARRIVAL AT 12:33 P.M. IN JUAN SANTA MARIA 
INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT IN SAN JOSE, COSTA RICA. 
 
-DEPARTURE FROM JUAN SANTA MARIA INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT AT 
10:05 A.M. ON FRIDAY, MARCH 12, 2004, ON FLIGHT NUMBER 2152 
WITH AMERICAN AIRLINES, ARRIVAL AT 1:49 P.M. IN MIAMI 
    INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT. 
 
-DEPARTURE FROM MIAMI INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT AT 4:00 P.M. ON 
FRIDAY, MARCH 12, 2004, ON FLIGHT NUMBER 483 WITH BRITISH 
WEST INDIES AIRWAYS, ARRIVAL AT 8:30 P.M. IN PIARCO AIRPORT. 
 
-DEPARTURE FROM PIARCO AIRPORT AT 1:30 P.M. ON FRIDAY, MARCH 
12, 2004, ON FLIGHT NUMBER 883 WITH BRITISH WEST INDIES 
AIRWAYS, ARRIVAL AT 12:55 A.M. ON SATURDAY, MARCH 13, 2004, 
IN ZANDERIJ INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT. 
 
3. THE EMBASSY HAS PURCHASED HANENBERG\'S TICKETS, WHICH HE 
HAS ALREADY COLLECTED.  THE EMBASSY HAS VERIFIED THAT 
HANENBERG DOES NOT REQUIRE A NEW VISA FOR HIS TRAVEL VIA THE 
US. 
 
BARNES 
 
NNNN 
"
"14587","3/4/2004 18:02","04PARAMARIBO195","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","04GEORGETOWN195","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000195 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR -- MSEIBEL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PBTS, NS, GY 
SUBJECT: SURINAME SHOCKED OVER GUYANA TAKING IT TO UNCLOS TO 
RESOLVE MARITIME BORDER DISPUTE 

REF: GEORGETOWN 195 
 
1.  UPON THEIR MARCH 2 RETURN TO SURINAME AFTER A VISIT TO 
CHINA, SURINAMESE PRESIDENT VENETIAAN AND MINISTER OF 
FOREIGN AFFAIRS MARIE LEVENS ANNOUNCED SURINAME\'S INTENT TO 
CAREFULLY STUDY THE CASE BROUGHT AGAINST SURINAME BY GUYANA 
BEFORE UN CONVENTION OF THE LAW OF THE SEAS (UNCLOS) 
REGARDING THE ONGOING MARITIME DISPUTE (BUT NOT LAND OR 
RIVER BORDER DISPUTES) BETWEEN THE TWO COUNTRIES.  THEY 
VOWED THAT THE GOS WOULD IMMERSE ITSELF IN PREPARATIONS FOR 
THE CASE. 
 
2.  SURINAME, ACCORDING TO LEVENS, WILL MOVE QUICKLY TO 
FORMULATE \"A RIGHT COUNTER ATTACK\" IN RESPONSE TO GUYANA\'S 
INITIATIVE AND WILL PRESENT ITS POSITION TO THE UN SHORTLY. 
LEVENS ADDED THAT, TO ASSIST ITS CASE, SURINAME WILL HIRE 
INTERNATIONAL ADVISORS, MANY OF WHOM HAVE ALREADY CONTACTED 
THE GOS OFFERING THEIR SERVICES.  SHE NOTED THAT THE GOS 
WILL UTILIZE A PREVIOUSLY SCHEDULED MAJOR SEMINAR ON 
EXCLUSIVE ECONOMIC ZONES THAT IS TO BE HELD IN MARCH IN 
SURINAME TO DISCUSS GUYANA\'S UNCLOS COMPLAINT WITH 
PARTICIPATING UN EXPERTS.  SHE ADDED THAT SURINAMESE 
AMBASSADORS AND OTHER EXPERTS WHO HAVE BEEN WORKING ON THE 
BORDER DISPUTE WILL BE CALLED BACK TO SURINAME SHORTLY FOR A 
WORKING MEETING TO DISCUSS GOS STRATEGY/TACTICS. 
 
3.  ACCORDING TO THE PRESS, VENENTIAAN DENIED THAT GUYANESE 
PRESIDENT JAGDEO HAD TRIED TO CONTACT HIM BEFORE GUYANA TOOK 
THE STEP OF BRINGING THIS ASPECT OF THE BORDER DISPUTE TO 
THE UN.  LEVENS TOLD THE PRESS THAT SHE WAS SURPRISED AND 
    DISAPPOINTED THAT GUYANA HAD CHOSEN TO ACTIVATE THE UNCLOS 
DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISM, PARTICULARLY AS GUYANA AND 
SURINAME HAVE HAD DISCUSSIONS BETWEEN THEIR JOINT BORDER 
COMMISSIONS IN THE PAST TWO YEARS.  LEVENS SAID THAT 
SURINAME HAD ACTED IN GOOD FAITH BASED ON ITS HOPE THAT A 
BILATERAL SOLUTION WOULD BE REACHED FOR THE ENTIRE BORDER 
DISPUTE.  SHE ADDED THAT, CONTRARY TO GUYANESE PRESIDENT 
BHARRAT JAGDEO\'S CLAIM THAT SURINAME HAS OBSTRUCTED EFFORTS 
TO RESOLVE THE BORDER DISPUTE, SURINAME HAS ALWAYS BEEN OPEN 
TO DIALOGUE. 
 
4.  IN LIGHT OF GUYANA\'S CASE BEFORE UNCLOS, LEVENS DECLARED 
CATEGORICALLY THAT GUYANA SHOULD VACATE THE DISPUTED 
TIGRI/NEW RIVER TRIANGLE AREA AND THAT THIS MOVE MUST BE 
TAKEN BEFORE DISCUSSIONS CAN CONTINUE ON THE UNCLOS MATTER. 
SHE POINTED OUT THAT GUYANA HAD AGREED TO REMOVE ITS TROOPS 
FROM THE DISPUTED LAND AREA IN THE 1973 TREATY OF 
CHAGUARAMAS. 
 
5.  COMMENT.  SURINAME SEEMED GENUINELY SHOCKED THAT GUYANA 
HAS GONE TO UNCLOS TO SEEK A RESOLUTION OF THE ONGOING 
MARITIME BORDER DISPUTE.  SURINAME HAS ALWAYS SOUGHT TO 
BUNDLE RESOLUTION OF THE THREE PARTS OF ITS BORDER DISPUTE 
WITH GUYANA (MARITIME, RIVERINE, LAND) TO LEVERAGE CLOSURE. 
IT CONSIDERS THE REAL BLOCKS TO PROGRESS (A) THE GUYANESE 
REFUSAL TO RESOLVE ALL THREE ASPECTS OF THE DISPUTE AT THE 
SAME TIME AND (B) THE GUYANESE MILITARY PRESENCE IN THE 
DISPUTED LAND BORDER REGION.  ONCE GUYANA RESOLVES THE 
MARITIME DISPUTE VIA THE UNCLOS PROCEDURE AND FOCUSES ON THE 
OFF-SHORE OIL FIELDS, SURINAME IS CONVINCED THAT THERE WILL 
BE LITTLE LIKELIHOOD THAT GUYANA WILL HAVE ANY INCENTIVE TO 
    RESOLVE THE REMAINING BORDER ISSUES, INCLUDING THE ULTRA- 
SENSITIVE (FROM SURINAME\'S POINT OF VIEW) TIGRI/NEW RIVER 
TRIANGLE DISPUTE.  END COMMENT. 
 
FAUCHER 
 
NNNN 
"
"14588","3/4/2004 18:05","04PARAMARIBO197","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","04PARAMARIBO159","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  PARAMARIBO 000197 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR -- MSEIBEL, WHA/PD - APRUITT, HAITI 
MONITORING TASK FORCE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, MARR, KPAO, NS 
SUBJECT: SURINAMESE FOREIGN MINISTER LEVENS EXPRESSES 
SUPPORT FOR CARICOM\"S POSTION ON HAITI; CORPORAL TELLS PRESS 
SURINAME\'S \"BLUE HELMET UNIT\" READY TO SERVE 
 
REFS: (A) PARAMARIBO 183, (B) PARAMARIBO 159 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  Following her return from a visit to China, Surinamese 
Foreign Minister, Marie Levens announced publicly that 
Suriname stands behind CARICOM on Haiti and is concerned 
about allegations made by ex-President Jean-Bertrand 
Aristide that the US forced him out of Haiti.  Levens 
suggested that if the US used strong-armed tactics in Haiti, 
the US could apply these tactics to any country. 
In other reactions to Haiti, a junior military soldier 
proclaimed that the Surinamese contingent of a UN Blue 
Helmet Unit, which had been deployed to Haiti previously, is 
ready to serve there once again.  He accused the government 
and the Armed Forces of neglecting the specially-trained 
unit and of failing to establish a crisis center to receive 
Haitian refugees.  By calling attention to these issues with 
his unauthorized remarks, the soldier hoped to pressure the 
government to take a proactive stance toward the Haitian 
crisis; instead, he is likely to face disciplinary action. 
End Summary. 
 
-------------------------------- 
FOREIGN MINISTER LEVENS ON HAITI 
-------------------------------- 
 
2.  Upon her return from a state visit to China, Foreign 
Minister Marie Levens publicly expressed support for the 
CARICOM position on Haiti, namely CARICOM\'s concerns over ex- 
Haitian President Jean-Bertrand Aristide\'s allegations that 
the US had forced him to leave Haiti.  According to the 
March 5 edition of local daily \"De Ware Tijd,\" Levens stated 
that, despite its absence at the March 3-4 emergency session 
convened by CARICOM President/Jamaican Prime Minister 
Percival Patterson in Kingston, Suriname was kept abreast of 
the deliberations, had studied CARICOM\'s position, and had 
written to CARICOM to offer support on the matter.  Levens 
was quoted as saying, \"if it can happen in Haiti, it can 
happen anywhere,\" echoing sentiments voiced by Patterson at 
a March 4 press conference. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
JUNIOR MILITARY PERSONNEL: MY UNIT IS READY TO GO TO HAITI 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
3.  Leven\'s comments followed press reports of a junior 
enlisted soldier\'s March 3 proclamation that the Surinamese 
contingent of a \"United Nations Blue Helmet force\" is ready 
to serve in Haiti.  The soldier, Corporal Dennis Duiker, 
told the press that the 31-member unit would like to put to 
use its United Nations training.  Moreover, Duiker pointed 
out that the unit brings experience to the table, not just 
training, referring to the unit\'s deployment to Haiti in 
1995.  Duiker criticized the Surinamese Armed Forces and the 
government for their alleged neglect of his unit and failure 
to establish a crisis center to receive Haitian refugees as 
yet.  In closing, Duiker expressed hope that his public 
statements would press the government to begin preparations 
to receive Haitian refugees. 
 
4.  Note:  The DATT spoke to a military contact who 
confirmed that in 1995, one military police squad and three 
squads of infantry personnel were deployed to Haiti.  Upon 
its return to Suriname, the unit was disbanded and its 
members returned to their branches.  The contact also said 
that the corporal would be disciplined for making 
unauthorized statements to the press.  End Note.) 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
5.  Given Suriname\'s penchant to fall in line with CARICOM\'s 
pronouncements and to call in to question US motives, Marie 
Leven\'s comments on Haiti come as no surprise.  Her 
sentiments do not seem to be shared by all Surinamers, 
however, as exhibited by the editorial line of Suriname\'s 
leading news dailies, which take a much more objective line 
 
on Aristide\'s claims.  The boldness exhibited by military 
personnel like Corporal Duiker and Major Goerdeyal (See Ref 
B) in discussing foreign policy matters with the press, 
however, is surprising and troubling.  These incidents 
display the GOS\' weak civilian control over the military -- 
a non-laughing matter given Suriname\'s turbulent history -- 
and a general willingness by GOS officials to speak freely 
to the press without taking into account possible negative 
repercussions.  End Comment. 
 
6.  Minimize considered. 
 
FAUCHER 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"14642","3/5/2004 18:49","04PARAMARIBO200","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE45159","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000200 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR: MSEIBEL, AND FOR EB/ESC/IEC/ENR: BLEVINE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG, EPET, NS 
SUBJECT: SIXTH WESTERN HEMISPHER ENERGY MINISTERIAL 
INVITATION EXTENDED TO MINISTER DEMON 
 
REF: STATE 45159 
 
IN RESPONSE TO REFTEL REQUEST, THE EMBASSY DELIVERED THE 
INVITATION TO THE SIXTH WESTERN HEMISPHERE ENERGY 
MINISTERIAL AND A RELATED BACKGROUND DOCUMENT FROM SECRETARY 
ABRAHAM TO THE MINISTER OF NATURAL RESOURCES FRANCO DEMON. 
    THE EMBASSY WILL REPORT SEPTEL THE MINISTER\'S RESPONSE TO 
THE INVITATION. 
 
FAUCHER 
 
NNNN 
"
"14710","3/8/2004 18:55","04PARAMARIBO203","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  PARAMARIBO 000203 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR -- MSEIBEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, NS 
SUBJECT: SURINAME POLITICAL PARTY SNAPSHOT: PALU: THE 
\"TAINTED\" PARTY 
 
REF: 01 PARAMARIBO 866 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  Established in 1977, the Progressive Workers and Farmers 
Union (PALU) is yet another marginal party trying to escape 
extinction in Suriname\'s crowded political scene.  Under the 
leadership of party leader Iwan Krolis, the mostly Creole 
party of 1,000 members uses its single National Assembly 
seat to advocate the development of the country\'s 
agricultural and logging sectors.  The party\'s greatest 
obstacle to political power is concern about the party since 
it was the sole political party willing to form a civilian 
government with the military regime immediately after the 
latter murdered 15 prominent opposition leaders in December 
1982.   Many Surinamers believe that PALU supported the 
murders and/or took advantage of the tragedy to gain 
political power.  In its defense, PALU claims that the party 
felt compelled to re-introduce democracy to Suriname, a 
responsibility no other party wanted to take on after the 
murders.  Even if voters looked past the party\'s ties to the 
military regime, the party faces an uphill battle as its one 
electoral district, Suriname\'s smallest, is expected to 
become a fierce battleground in the upcoming 2005 elections. 
End Summary. 
 
-------------- 
PARTY OVERVIEW 
-------------- 
 
2.  With its single National Assembly seat (out of the 
country\'s 51 seats), the Progressive Workers and Farmers 
Union (PALU), comprised of neo-socialist intellectuals, is 
yet another marginalized party in Suriname that is 
struggling to stay alive.  Led since its 1977 founding by 
party chairman Iwan Krolis, the predominantly Creole 
opposition party of 1,000 members maintains a low-profile 
while promoting a limited platform: development of the 
country\'s agricultural and, to a lesser extent, logging 
sectors. 
 
3.  During a recent conversation with the Embassy, Krolis 
elaborated on the party\'s aims, voicing support for 
additional government incentives to stimulate the 
agricultural sector (i.e., by providing cheap loans and 
subsidies for inputs like fertilizer and equipment.)  In 
addition, Krolis, who is also head of the Foundation for 
Forest Management (SBB), advocated sustainable forestry 
through granting full authority to the SBB to permit the 
country to more effectively exploit its rich timber 
resources. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
PALU TAINTED BY TIES TO BOUTERSE\"S REGIME 
----------------------------------------- 
 
4.  Krolis cited PALU\'s involvement in the early 1980s with 
the military regime as the greatest obstacle to broader 
political support.  In the party\'s early years, PALU 
remained a small, marginalized party.  With the military\'s 
rise to power, Embassy sources say, the PALU saw an 
opportunity to gain entry to the government by supporting 
the military regime.  By 1982, Surinamers began to clamor 
for the military to fulfill its 1980 pledge to return the 
country to civilian rule.  In support of the military 
regime, PALU members tried to dampen those demands by 
warning the more vocal government critics that there might 
be dire consequences of openly opposing the regime. 
 
5.  After the December 1982 military regime\'s murder of 15 
government opponents, PALU joined the military regime (in 
February 1983) in a coalition government leading many to 
conclude that PALU was at least morally complicit in the 
murders.  PALU party leaders Iwan Krolis and Errol Alibux 
are included in the official list of December 1982 murder 
suspects; the investigation into the murders is still 
ongoing. 
 
6.   Alibux served as prime minister in the coalition 
government from February 1983 to January 1984.  (Note: 
Alibux later joined military strongman Desi Boauterse\'s NDP 
political party in 1997, serving as Minister of Natural 
Resources and Finance under the Wijdenbosch Administration. 
Alibux was convicted of corruption in November 2003.  End 
Note.)  The military-PALU coalition government was short 
lived.  PALU was ousted in January 1984 in the wake of labor 
strikes protesting a tax hike to raise revenue after the 
Netherlands ceased making payments to Suriname as stipulated 
in the 1975 treaty granting Suriname its independence and 
 
 
3.5 billion Dutch guilders (1.75 billion USD) in development 
assistance. 
 
------------------------------ 
KROLIS RESPONDS TO HIS CRITICS 
------------------------------ 
 
7.  In his conversation with the Embassy, Krolis vigorously 
denied critics\' charges that PALU had encouraged the 
military regime to violently quell the rising opposition. 
Krolis insisted that the party had only warned the public 
about possible drastic actions by the military prior to the 
tragedy.  In PALU\'s defense, Krolis insisted that the party 
did not sanction the murders nor did it take advantage of 
the tragedy to gain political power.  He maintained that the 
party only formed a civilian government with the military 
regime to help re-introduce democracy to Suriname since 
there were no other parties willing to step up to the plate 
to fulfill this important function in the wake of the 
murders. 
 
8.  Krolis claimed that while in office, PALU worked 
diligently to convince the military to work with civilians 
to unite the country.  These efforts, he said, culminated in 
PALU\'s organization of the February 25, 1983, reconciliation 
day, \"Brasa Dee,\" to bring supporters and opponents of the 
military together.  Critics, however, dismissed the one-time 
event as a largely symbolic gesture that did little to calm 
the fears civilians harbored toward the military.  Referring 
to the party\'s 1984 ouster, Krolis portrayed the party as a 
victim of the military regime.  Despite its removal from 
power, PALU continued to strive for the country\'s political 
and economic development.  Its work on preliminary 
discussions between the military regime and rebels who waged 
the 1987-1992 Interior War, Krolis claimed, contributed to 
the 1992 Accord for National Reconciliation and Development. 
(Note: Embassy sources dispute Krolis\' version of the PALU\'s 
involvement in negotiating the 1992 Accord, maintaining that 
PALU made no contribution to the agreement.  End Note.) 
 
----------------------------------- 
LOOKING AHEAD TO THE 2005 ELECTIONS 
----------------------------------- 
 
9.  With its questionable ties to the Bouterse regime, as 
well as its limited mandate, its small size, and its lack of 
financial resources, PALU faces an uphill battle in the 
upcoming 2005 elections.  In the 2000 elections, PALU 
captured one of two seats in Coronie, Suriname\'s smallest 
electoral district, a rural district populated mostly by 
Creoles and Javanese.  In 2000, the PALU realized that with 
only 300 votes needed to win one of Cornonie\'s two seats, 
the major political parties had ignored this potentially 
influential district.  PALU focused its meager campaign 
funds on this small rural district, promoting its 
agricultural platform, easily winning its single National 
Assembly seat.  In the upcoming 2005 elections, however, 
other political parties have realized the error of their 
ways and have already begun actively courting Coronie\'s 
voters.  PALU will likely have to double its efforts if it 
is to retain its only National Assembly seat. 
 
10.  Regarding the party\'s strategy for the 2005 elections, 
PALU National Assembly member Anton Paal told the Embassy 
that the party will adhere to the game plan it followed in 
the 2000 elections -- it will field candidates in the three 
districts where the party\'s power base is located 
(Paramaribo, Wanica, and Coronie).  He said that the party 
would like to field candidates in more, if not all, of the 
country\'s ten districts but is unable to do so due to 
financial constraints.  At this time, there are no plans for 
PALU to enter into a coalition with other political parties, 
but Paal hinted that the party would consider teaming up 
with a partner, including Bouterse\'s National Democratic 
Party (NDP), if asked. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
11.  PALU remains a party haunted by its past.  Although the 
December 1982 murders took place over two decades ago, many 
Surinamers direct some of their anger over the murders at 
PALU, while, ironically, former military strongman Desi 
Bouterse and his supporters enjoy significant support -- so 
much so that they are the largest opposition group in 
Suriname.  For now, PALU\'s main hurdle is surviving the 2005 
elections; it faces an uphill battle as it tries to hold on 
to its one National Assembly seat in Coronie, which is 
expected to become a major electoral battleground in the 
2005 elections.  Failure to win a seat increases the 
 
 
likelihood that much-maligned PALU will wither away.  End 
Comment. 
 
FAUCHER 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"14866","3/11/2004 18:42","04PARAMARIBO225","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE52611","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

111842Z Mar 04
","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000225 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR - MSEIBEL, HAITI MONITORING TASK FORCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREF, PREL, EAID, NS 
SUBJECT: SURINAME: NO LIKELY HUMANITARIAN AID FOR HAITI 
 
REF: STATE 52611 
 
PER REFTEL, THE EMBASSY MET WITH TERENCE CRAIG, THE MINISTRY 
OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AMERICAS DIVISION HEAD, ON MARCH 11 TO 
CONVEY THE U.S. CALL TO INTERNATIONALIZE HUMANITARIAN AID 
    FOR HAITI.  AS EXPECTED, CRAIG REFRAINED FROM PROVIDING A 
RESPONSE ON THE MATTER; HE EXPLAINED THAT HIS GOVERNMENT HAS 
NOT DISCUSSED ITS POLICY TOWARD HAITI IN GREAT DETAIL AS IT 
HAS BEEN CONSUMED BY OTHER MATTERS -- GUYANA\'S RECENT 
DECISION TO TAKE SURINAME TO COURT OVER THE ONGOING MARITIME 
BORDER DISPUTE, THE RECENT STATE VISIT BY PRESIDENT 
VENETIAAN TO CHINA, AND PREPARATIONS FOR BRAZILIAN PRESIDENT 
LULA\'S UPCOMING VISIT TO SURINAME.  TO ILLUSTRATE THIS 
POINT, CRAIG NOTED THAT SURINAME WAS NOT PRESENT AT THE 
MARCH 3-4 CARICOM EMERGENCY MEETING IN JAMAICA TO DISCUSS 
THE HAITI SITUATION.  STILL, CRAIG INDICATED THAT HIS 
GOVERNMENT FACES FINANCIAL DIFFICULTIES AND WOULD BE HARD- 
PRESSED TO OFFER FINANCIAL SUPPORT TO HAITIAN REFUGEES, BUT 
DID NOT SPECULATE ON WHAT OTHER TYPES OF ASSISTANCE SURINAME 
COULD OFFER AT THIS TIME.  HE PROMISED TO INFORM THE EMBASSY 
OF SURINAME\'S RESPONSE TO THE U.S. CALL TO INTERNATIONALIZE 
HUMANITARIAN AID FOR HAITI AT A LATER DATE. 
 
FAUCHER 
 
NNNN 
"
"17925","6/17/2004 18:30","04PARAMARIBO454","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000454 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
FOR WHA/CAR: MSEIBEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC, PREL, NS 
SUBJECT:  THANK YOU NOTE FROM MINISTER LEVENS 
 
 
1.  IN A DIPLOMATIC NOTE RECEIVED JUNE 17, THE SURINAMESE 
MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS REQUESTED THAT POST FORWARD A 
THANK YOU NOTE FROM THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS MARIA E. 
LEVENS TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE COLIN L. POWELL.  THE 
SIGNED ORIGINAL WILL BE FORWARDED VIA POUCH TO STATE, 
WHA/CAR, FOR APPROPRIATE HANDLING.  THE TEXT IS AS FOLLOWS: 
 
2.  BEGIN TEXT: 
 
HIS EXCELLENCY COLIN L. POWELL 
SECRETARY OF STATE OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
 
SIPDIS 

IN EXPRESSING MY SINCERE APPRECIATION FOR YOUR KIND PERSONAL 
ATTENTION DURING MY MEDICAL TREATMENT, I AM MOST THANKFUL TO 
INFORM YOU THAT I AM RECOVERING WELL AND HAVE TODAY RETURNED 
TO THE OFFICE PART-TIME. 
 
PLEASE ACCEPT, YOUR EXCELLENCY, THE ASSURANCES OF MY HIGHEST 
CONSIDERATION. 
 
BEST REGARDS 
 
//SS// 
 
MARIA E. LEVENS 
MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 
OF THE REPUBLIC OF SURINAME 
 
PARAMARIBO, JUNE 15, 2004 
 
END TEXT 
 
BARNES 
 
NNNN 
"
"18051","6/22/2004 19:23","04PARAMARIBO464","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000464 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR -- MSEIBEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, MARR, NS 
SUBJECT: SURINAMESE DEFENSE MINISTER SHARES VIEWS ON 
SECURITY 
 
 
1.  (U)  DURING THE JUNE 14 OPENING OF A COURSE ENTITLED 
    \"THE THEORIES AND REALITIES OF THE SECURITY OF SMALL 
STATES\" SPONSORED BY ANTON DE KOM UNIVERSITY\'S INSTITUTE OF 
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS, SURINAMESE MINISTER OF DEFENSE 
RONALD ASSEN PROVIDED A RARE GLIMPSE OF SURINAME\'S DEFENSE 
STANDPOINT.  IN HIS KEYNOTE ADDRESS TO STUDENTS AND INVITED 
GUESTS, ASSEN DEFINED SECURITY AS THE \"ABSENCE OF FOREIGN 
ARMED MILITARY AGGRESSION, TERRORISM, AND LOCAL AND TRANS- 
NATIONAL CRIME.\"  HE NAMED THE LACK OF FUNDING FOR 
PERSONNEL, TRAINING, AND OPERATIONS AND THE ENTANGLEMENT OF 
NATIONAL SECURITY FORCES WITH DOMESTIC AND INTERNATIONAL 
CRIMINAL ORGANIZATIONS AS KEY FACTORS HAMPERING SMALL 
STATES IN THEIR EFFORTS TO BEEF UP THEIR SECURITY POSTURE. 
 
2.  (U)  ASSEN SUGGESTED THAT SMALL STATES CAN OVERCOME 
THEIR FINANCIAL PROBLEMS IN PART BY FORGING ALLIANCES WITH 
INTERNATIONAL PARTNERS BUT CAUTIONED THAT SUCH ALLIANCES 
COULD RESULT IN OVER-DEPENDENCE ON A SINGLE DONOR.  TO 
EMPHASIZE THIS POINT, HE REFERRED TO THE UNANIMOUS 
CONCLUSION REACHED BY CARIBBEAN COMMANDERS IN CHIEFS WHO 
ATTENDED THE JUNE 1-3 CARIBBEAN NATIONS SECURITY CONFERENCE 
(CANSEC) IN MIAMI ORGANIZED BY THE U.S. SOUTHERN COMMAND 
(SOUTHCOM) THAT SOUTHCOM\'S MILITARY ASSISTANCE TO THEIR 
COUNTRIES IS ESSENTIAL TO THEIR EFFORTS TO PROMOTE 
SECURITY.  ASSEN RECOMMENDED THAT SMALL STATES DIVERSIFY 
THEIR MILITARY SPONSORS TO PREVENT THEIR OVER-DEPENDENCE ON 
A SINGLE DONOR FROM BECOMING A \"POLITICAL MECHANISM IN 
FOREIGN HANDS.\"  AT THE SAME TIME, HOWEVER, HE CONCEDED 
THAT THE NUMBER OF STATES WILLING TO GIVE CONSIDERABLE 
MILITARY ASSISTANCE TO CARICOM IS LIMITED. 
 
3.  (U)  ASSEN CALLED ATTENTION TO CARICOM\'S ONGOING 
    DISCUSSIONS ABOUT THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A REGIONAL SECURITY 
SYSTEM PROPOSED BY CARICOM HEADS OF STATE ONE YEAR AGO.  HE 
SAID THAT CARICOM MEMBER-STATES ARE PREPARING THE 
FOUNDATION FOR A \"REGIONAL RAPID RESPONSE MECHANISM\" THAT 
WOULD ENABLE CARICOM TO COMBAT AND ELIMINATE THREATS TO 
NATIONAL AND REGIONAL SECURITY AND TO MANAGE POLITICAL 
CRISES OR DISASTERS.  NOTABLY, HE DID NOT ELABORATE ON 
WHICH ALLIES WOULD BE PICKING UP THE TAB FOR SUCH A FORCE. 
IN CLOSING, ASSEN URGED CARICOM MEMBER STATES TO INVEST 
MORE IN NATIONAL SECURITY FORCES, WITHOUT ELABORATING ON 
SURINAME\'S OWN PLANS ON THAT FRONT. 
 
4.  (SBU)  COMMENT.  THE CONTINUING FALLOUT TO HOLD A NEW 
HORIZONS EXERCISE HERE THIS SUMMER HAS CLEARLY INFLUENCED 
ASSEN\'S REMARKS.  THE GOVERNMENT APPEARS TO HAVE BEEN TAKEN 
BY SURPRISE BY THE PUBLIC CRITICISM OF ITS FAILURE TO TAKE 
ADVANTAGE OF AN INFUSION OF CASH INTO THE ECONOMY AND THE 
CONSTRUCTION OF MEDICAL CLINICS.  ONE PARLIAMENTARIAN WHO 
IS A MEMBER OF THE GOVERNING COALITION ASSERTED THAT 
SURINAME\'S SOVEREIGNTY WAS WORTH MORE THAN U.S. HANDOUTS. 
CLEARLY ASSEN IS PICKING UP ON THIS THEME, WHILE 
RECOGNIZING THE IMPORTANCE OF U.S. ASSISTANCE, ASSERTING 
SURINAME\'S INDEPENDENT AND PRINCIPLED POSITION IN ENTERING 
INTO AGREEMENTS WITH FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS.  THIS STRUTTING 
POSTURE IS GOOD FOR LOCAL CONSUMPTION IN THE RUN UP TO NEXT 
YEAR\'S ELECTION.  ASSEN, HOWEVER, REALIZES THAT NO OTHER 
DONOR IS WAITING IN THE WINGS TO ASSIST THE SURINAMESE 
MILITARY.  END COMMENT. 
 
BARNES 
 

 
NNNN 
"
"18219","6/29/2004 10:59","04PARAMARIBO476","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000476 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
FOR WHA/CAR - MSEIBEL, REAGAN CONDOLENCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC, PREL, NS 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT VENETIAAN PRESENTS SYMPATHY LETTER 
MARKING FORMER PRESIDENT REAGAN\'S DEATH 
 
1.  THE EMBASSY RECEIVED ON JUNE 22 A DIPLOMATIC NOTE WITH A 
SYMPATHY LETTER ADDRESSED TO PRESIDENT BUSH BY PRESIDENT 
VENETIAAN MARKING THE DEATH OF FORMER PRESIDENT RONALD 
REAGAN.  THE SIGNED ORIGINAL WILL BE FORWARDED VIA POUCH TO 
WHA/CAR FOR APPROPRIATE HANDLING.  PRESIDENT VENETIAAN ALSO 
PERSONALLY SIGNED A CONDOLENCE BOOK ON JUNE 8, 2004 AT THE 
EMBASSY.  THE TEXT OF HIS LETTER IS AS FOLLOWS: 
 
2.  BEGIN TEXT: 
 
    HIS EXCELLENCY GEORGE W. BUSH 
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
 
EXCELLENCY, 
 
IT IS WITH DEEP REGRET THAT I LEARNED OF THE DEMISE OF THE 
FORMER PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, THE 
HONOURABLE RONALD REAGAN, ON JUNE 5, 2004. 
 
HE WAS INDEED A GREAT MAN TO THE UNITED STATES WHICH HE HAS 
SERVED WITH SUCH GREAT DISTINCTION.  MR. REAGAN WILL ALSO BE 
REMEMBERED FOR HIS HISTORICAL ROLE IN THE PROCESS OF 
BRINGING PEACE TO THE WORLD. 
 
ON BEHALF OF THE GOVERNMENT AND PEOPLE OF THE REPUBLIC OF 
SURINAME, I HEREWITH EXTEND OUR DEEPEST SYMPATHY TO THE 
GOVERNMENT AND PEOPLE OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND 
ESPECIALLY TO THE BEREAVED FAMILY. 
 
MAY ETERNAL PEACE BE HIS FOREVER. 
 
//SS// 
 
RUNALDO RONALD VENETIAAN 
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SURINAME 
 
PARAMARIBO, 8 JUNE 2004 
 
END TEXT 
 
BARNES 

 
NNNN 
"
"18385","7/2/2004 18:41","04PARAMARIBO483","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","04PARAMARIBO196","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000483 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR -- MSEIBEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, PHUM, PGOV, NS 
SUBJECT: SURINAMESE BANANA LABOR UNION SEEKS REREFENDUM TO 
REPRESENT WORKERS FROM STATE-OWNED BANANA COMPANY 
 
REF: PARAMARIBO 196 
 
1.  IN A JUNE 15 ARTICLE IN LOCAL DAILY \"DAGBLAD SURINAME,\" 
JARIKABA BANANA WORKERS UNION (JWB) SECRETARY STUART 
    CODRINGTON ANNOUNCED THAT THE UNION HAD FILED A REQUEST 
WITH THE GOVERNMENT MEDIATION COUNCIL (BR) TO HOLD A 
REFERENDUM AMONG WORKERS IN SURINAME\'S REVIVED BANANA 
SECTOR.  HE DECLARED THAT THE UNION REPRESENTS ALL BANANA 
SECTOR WORKERS AND THAT CURRENT LABOR LAWS SUPPORT THE 
UNION\'S INITIATIVE.  HE EXPLAINED THAT THE UNION HAD 
REPEATEDLY REQUESTED MEETINGS WITH THE FOUNDATION FOR 
PRESERVATION OF THE BANANA SECTOR (SBBS), THE COMPANY 
RESPONSIBLE FOR REHIRING WORKERS AT SURLAND (SURINAME\'S 
PUBLICLY OWNED BANANA COMPANY), AFTER IT HAD RECEIVED 
REPORTS FROM WORKERS ABOUT THEIR POOR WORKING CONDITIONS AS 
WELL AS REQUESTS FOR UNION REPRESENTATION.  CODRINGTON ALSO 
ACCUSED THE SBBS BOARD OF VIOLATING THE RIGHT OF 
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY, WHICH IS VESTED IN THE COUNTRY\'S 
CONSTITUTION.  FAILURE TO MEET WITH THE MEDIATION COUNCIL, 
HE WARNED, MIGHT FORCE WORKERS TO STRIKE. 
 
2.  SURLAND BOARD OF DIRECTORS AND SBBS CHAIR ANDRE BRAHIM 
DISMISSED JARIKABA\'S POSTURE IN A SUBSEQUENT CONVERSATION 
WITH THE EMBASSY.   HE EMPHASIZED THE EFFORTS THAT HAD BEEN 
MADE TO RESTART SURLAND AFTER THE GOVERNMENT WAS FORCED TO 
CEASE OPERATIONS IN APRIL 2002 DUE TO MANAGEMENT AS WELL AS 
LABOR PROBLEMS STEMMING FROM STRIKES OVER BONUSES AND 
CREDITED HIS FOUNDATION AND THE EUROPEAN UNION\'S FINANCIAL 
ASSISTANCE FOR REJUVENATING SURLAND.  BRAHIM COUNTERED 
CODRINGTON\'S COMMENTS BY NOTING THAT, TO DATE, THE SBBS 
BOARD HAD NOT RECEIVED COMPLAINTS FROM THE WORKERS ABOUT 
THEIR WORKING CONDITIONS.  HE DISCOUNTED THE NEED FOR A 
UNION SINCE THE WORKERS DO NOT HAVE REGULAR JOBS -- SBBS IS 
OFFERING WORKERS THREE-MONTH CONTRACTS -- AND SHRUGGED OFF 
MEETINGS WITH THE MEDIATION COUNCIL GIVEN THE ABSENCE OF 
    CONFLICT WITH WORKERS.  BRAHIM ALSO EXPRESSED CONCERN THAT 
LABOR TROUBLES MIGHT SCARE OFF POTENTIAL INVESTORS WANTING 
TO BUY SURLAND. 
 
3.  COMMENT.  SURLAND HAS WEATHERED A LONG LIST OF PROBLEMS 
-- POOR MANAGEMENT, CRIPPLING LABOR STRIKES, POLITICAL 
INFIGHTING, OUTDATED TECHNOLOGY, AND HUGE DEBTS (SEE 
REFTEL) -- AND IS NOW BACK ON TRACK IN THE BANANA EXPORT 
BUSINESS.  HOWEVER, TALK OF DISCONTENT AMONG SURLAND\'S 
REHIRED BANANA WORKERS AND JARIKABA\'S ATTEMPTS TO ESTABLISH 
A UNION AT THIS TIME COULD POTENTIALLY DISSUADE INVESTORS 
FROM BUYING THE COMPANY, THEREBY THREATEN SURINAME\'S LARGE- 
SCALE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION AND ITS FIRST SHOT AT 
PRIVATIZATION.  FORTUNATELY FOR SURINAME, SURLAND\'S WORKERS 
HAVE NOT MADE PUBLIC COMMENTS TO SUPPORT JARIKABA\'S CLAIMS 
OF POOR WORKING CONDITIONS.  MOREOVER, BASED ON OUR 
CONVERSATION WITH MANAGEMENT, MANAGEMENT IS CONFIDENT THAT 
SURLAND\'S LABOR FORCE HAS LEARNED ITS LESSONS FROM THE PAST 
AND IS COMMITTED TO MAKING SURLAND THRIVE.  GIVEN THIS 
BACKDROP, JARIKABA\'S POSTURING MAY BE A PLOY TO RECLAIM 
SOME OF ITS INFLUENCE AMONG SURLAND\'S WORKFORCE.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
BARNES 
 
NNNN 
"
"18623","7/12/2004 17:48","04PARAMARIBO502","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  PARAMARIBO 000502 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR -- MSEIBEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, PHUM, PGOV, NS 
SUBJECT: UNEMPLOYED MAROONS PROTESTING LACK OF JOB 
OPPORTUNITIES BARRICADE MAIN HIGHWAY, COMMANDEER BUSFUL OF 
WORKERS HEADING TO CANADIAN GOLD MINING COMPANY CAMBIOR 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  After two days of unrest, protesters who had been 
disrupting operations of the Canadian gold mining company 
Cambior, in Suriname\'s Brokopondo district, decided to seek 
a peaceful resolution to address their key demand. 
Displeased with Cambior\'s alleged employment practices, 
protesters called on the government to revoke part of 
Cambior\'s concession and to grant them land for small-scale 
gold mining.  The move to a peaceful resolution followed 
the commandeering of a busload of Cambior workers who were 
later released unharmed and the barricading of a major 
highway leading to Cambior\'s gold mine, which resulted in 
the police and the military being deployed to the area. 
Former military strongman Desi Bouterse\'s National 
Democratic Party quickly denied that it played a role in 
the disturbances amidst accusations that the disturbances 
were politically motivated in the run up to the May 2005 
elections.  End Summary. 
 
----------------------- 
TEMPORARY END TO UNREST 
----------------------- 
 
2.  According to local media reports, on July 2, young 
unemployed protesters from the Maroon village of Nieuw 
Koffiekamp agreed to cease disrupting operations of the 
Canadian gold mining company Cambior, in Brokopondo 
district, 85 kilometers south of Suriname\'s capital 
Paramaribo.  (Note: Maroons are descendants of slaves that 
escaped harsh slave masters to Suriname\'s remote interior. 
End Note.)  The protesters had targeted Cambior because it 
allegedly hired most of its workers from the capital, 
Paramaribo, rather than surrounding villages.  They decided 
to give the government time to review their proposal to 
revoke part of the concession granted to Cambior and to 
provide them with land for small-scale gold mining.  They 
made no mention of what time frame was accorded to the 
government or what steps they would take if the government 
did not meet this demand. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
PROTESTERS COMMANDEER BUSFUL OF WORKERS, BARRICADE HIGHWAY 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
3.  The protesters\' decision to seek a peaceful resolution 
of their claim followed two days of unrest.  On June 28, 
protesters commandeered and then released a busful of 
Cambior workers near Nieuw Koffiekamp after they were 
unsuccessful in obtaining support from two nearby villages, 
Klaaskreek and Marchallkreek.  They demanded that the 
government permit them to engage in small-scale gold 
mining, that it address continuing power outages, and that 
it pave Afobaka highway.  They threatened to start a new 
interior war if the government failed to address their 
demands.  (Note:  Maroon soldier Ronny Brunswijk led a 
guerilla insurgency against the Desi Bouterse-led military 
regime in 1987 which ended in 1992, with acceptance of the 
Kourou Peace Accords.  End Note.) 
 
4.  In response to the disturbance, the government deployed 
police in the area to restore order and refused requests to 
negotiate with the protesters until they ceased disrupting 
the peace.  Minister of Regional Development Romeo Van 
Russell stated publicly that the government would do its 
utmost to maintain contact with the protesters but vowed 
that it would resort to more serious measures if the 
protesters continued to disrupt Cambior\'s mining 
operations. 
 
5.  The bus incident followed a June 27 altercation in 
which the police and the military had to use tear gas on 
protesters who had barricaded the Afobaka highway.  Prior 
to that incident, Brokopondo District Commissioner Hugo 
Pinas and village captain Ludwich Wijnerman initiated talks 
with the protesters in an attempt to seek a peaceful 
resolution to the conflict.  However, during talks between 
representatives of the protesters, the District 
Commissioner, and Cambior\'s management, other protesters 
started to throw stones at two fuel trucks on their way to 
Cambior\'s premises.  When the protesters attempted to set a 
barricade made of old tires ablaze, the government had to 
deploy military and police reinforcements to clear the 
road. 
 
----------------------------- 
REACTIONS TO THE DISTURBANCES 
----------------------------- 
 
6.  Village leaders and representatives of the protesters 
engaged in talks have been quick to condemn the radical 
posture of a minority group.  The village leaders, in 
particular, expressed fears that Cambior would abandon 
agricultural and animal husbandry projects worth 30,000 
Surinamese dollars (about $12,000).  Bert Eersteling, one 
of the leaders of the Nieuw Koffiekamp Collective, a group 
that supports Cambior\'s activities, told the Embassy he 
believes that the radicals, who number around a dozen 
individuals, are being manipulated by people from 
Paramaribo with interests in the gold mining sector.  He 
added that former military strongman Desi Bouterse\'s 
National Democratic Party will try to capitalize 
politically on the problems at Nieuw Koffiekamp, as 
campaigning for the May 2005 elections has already begun. 
 
7.  Amidst swirling rumors of NDP\'s involvement, the party 
quickly denied that it had instigated the disturbances. 
NDP National Assembly member Yvonne Pinas publicly accused 
the government of blaming the opposition for its mistakes. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
8.  The Afobaka disturbances highlight longstanding 
grievances held by residents in Suriname\'s interior over 
successive governments\' refusal to recognize longstanding 
land claims.  Cambior, for its part, has tried to make 
peace with villagers through employment opportunities, 
funding for local projects, and community committee input. 
This has done little to appease the Nieuw Koffiekampers. 
Still, it is highly unlikely that the government would 
revoke a portion of Cambior\'s concession and distribute the 
land to the protesters, a move that would surely undermine 
the confidence of any future investors in Suriname.  Until 
the government, Cambior, and villagers negotiate an 
agreement which resolves the issue of surface rights, the 
Gross Rosebel mine will remain a bone of contention for 
Nieuw Koffiekampers.  Opposition parties like the NDP can 
be expected to exploit it in the run up to the 2005 
elections.  End Comment. 
 
BARNES 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"18652","7/13/2004 13:29","04PARAMARIBO504","Embassy Paramaribo","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE139422","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L PARAMARIBO 000504 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR MSEIBEL 
NSC FOR KRISTEN MADISON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/09/2014 
TAGS: PREF, PREL, SMIG, MARR, HA, XL, NS 
SUBJECT: SURINAME: MULLING OVER RESETTLEMENT OF PROTECTED CUBAN AND 
HAITIAN MIGRANTS AT GUANTANAMO NAVAL BASE 
 
REF: STATE 139422 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Marsha E. Barnes; reasons 1.5 (B) 
and (D). 
 
1. (U) This is an action request.  Please see paragraph 3. 
 
2.  (C) The Ambassador delivered reftel points on Cuban and Haitian 
migrants at Guantanamo Naval Base to Surinamese Foreign Minister 
Marie Levens on July 9, and asked for Suriname\'s assistance in 
providing a resettlement opportunity for the migrants.  Levens 
responded, \"We can discuss this.\"  She told the Ambassador that it 
would be helpful to have information on the refugees such as their 
skills and if they have any friends or family already in Suriname, 
noting that Suriname already has a Haitian community.  Levens 
reminded the Ambassador that Suriname had opened its doors to 
Haitian refugees in 1996 and said that it would be willing to look 
at the issue again. 
 
3. (C) In light of Levens favorable response, the Embassy requests 
copies of biographies for migrants seeking resettlement.  Also, 
information on any family or acquaintances currently living in 
Suriname that any of the migrants have may also be helpful in 
assisting the GOS in making a decision.  Biographies may be sent via 
classified email to Vernelle Trim. 
 
BARNES 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"18715","7/14/2004 17:47","04PARAMARIBO514","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  PARAMARIBO 000514 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR -- MSEIBEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, NS, DESI BOUTERSE 
SUBJECT: NEW POLL SHOWS INCREASING SUPPORT FOR FORMER 
PRESIDENT JULES WIJDENBOSCH, NATIONAL DEMOCRATIC PARTY 
 
REF: 03 PARAMARIBO 116 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  A poll taken of voters residing in Suriname\'s capital 
Paramaribo by a respected polling organization revealed the 
extent of voters\' dissatisfaction with the ruling New Front 
coalition ahead of the upcoming May 2005 elections.  Poll 
results indicate that former President Jules Wijdenbosch 
(1996-2000) currently leads the Presidential pack (with 
35.7 percent of the votes) despite mass protests over his 
mismanagement of the economy which forced him to call for 
elections a year earlier than planned in 2000, a move that 
brought the current New Front government to power.  The 
National Democratic Party led by former military strongman 
Desi Bouterse emerged as the most popular party (with 18 
percent of the votes).  A significant number of voters 
(43.5%) remained uncommitted.  Both ruling coalition and 
opposition politicians found reason for optimism in the 
poll results.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
RULING NEW FRONT COALITION DOWN IN POLLS 
---------------------------------------- 
 
2.  Suriname\'s local media reported on July 5 and 6 the 
results of a poll conducted June 11 to 13 by the respected 
Institute for Development Oriented Studies (IDOS), which 
revealed that former President Jules Wijdenbosch (1996- 
2000) had captured the most votes ahead of the May 2005 
elections.  35.7 percent of a random sample of 350 voters 
residing in Paramaribo, the country\'s capital, expressed 
preference for Wijdenbosch despite the fact that 
Wijdenbosch\'s mismanagement of the country\'s economy 
spurred mass demonstrations by opposition groups and labor 
unions which forced him to call for elections a year 
earlier than planned, a move which brought the ruling New 
Front coalition to power in the 2000 elections.  25.3% and 
21.6% of respondents expressed their preference for former 
military strongman Desi Bouterse and for President Ronald 
Venetiaan, respectively. 
 
3.  The poll revealed that Bouterse\'s National Democratic 
Party (NDP) is the most popular political party in 
Paramaribo.  18% of respondents said that they would vote 
for NDP, an increase of 4.5% compared with a February IDOS 
poll.  The New Front coalition, which is made up of the 
National Party of Suriname, the Verenigde Hervormings 
Partij, the Suriname Labor Party, and Pertjaja Luhur, 
captured 18.8% of the votes, suffering a net loss of 3.4%. 
A1, a new coalition of four small parties, almost doubled 
its support with 4.9% of the voters while only 5.6% of 
respondents said that they would vote for Wijdenbosch\'s 
party, Democratic National Platform 2000 (DNP 2000). 
 
4.  A striking feature of the IDOS poll concerned the 
significant number of uncommitted and nonvoters. 
According to the poll, a total of 43.3 percent of 
Paramaribo\'s voters fell into this category: 35 percent 
were uncommitted and 8.2 percent were non-voters.  Based on 
these results, if the elections were held today in 
Paramaribo, the division of Paramaribo\'s 17 National 
Assembly seats would be as follows: Bouterse\'s NDP 4, the 
New Front coalition 3, and Wijdenbosch\'s DNP 2000 and A1 
each one seat, while non-committed voters would control 8 
seats. 
 
--------- 
REACTIONS 
--------- 
 
5.  In public statements, both coalition and opposition 
leaders acknowledged the importance of polls in developing 
an election strategy and attempted to put a positive spin 
on the poll results.  Paul Somohardjo, leader of the New 
Front coalition party Pertjaja Luhur (and former NF 
Minister of Social Affairs squeezed out in a sexual 
harassment scandal in February 2003), emphasized that the 
results have to be placed in the proper perspective by 
taking into account the limited polling area (Paramaribo), 
as well as other factors, such as the age group, ethnicity, 
and the address of respondents.  (See Reftel.)  For his 
part, former President Jules Wijdenbosch focused on the 
need to tap into the large number of uncommitted voters who 
he said would decide the elections.  He also declared that 
it is time to abandon the National Assembly\'s appointing 
the country\'s President after elections in favor of 
electing the president by popular vote.  Winston Jessurun, 
leader of the newly established coalition A1, expressed his 
 
 
pleasure with the doubling of voter support.  Jessurun 
vowed that A1, which is campaigning for a new draft 
constitution with a parliamentary system and proportional 
representation, would work harder to make itself more 
widely known to capture a significant share of the 
uncommitted voters. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
6.  The IDOS poll results are yet another sign of existing 
dissatisfaction with the ruling New Front coalition. 
Voters remain unhappy chiefly with rising living costs, 
despite the country\'s projected 5 percent economic growth, 
the increased crime rate, and Venetiaan\'s perceived lack of 
charisma, along with his administration\'s slow-paced 
decision-making.  They see Wijdenbosch as a can-do, 
decisive politician and are willing to downplay his 
mismanagement of the economy and the widespread belief that 
his administration raised the bar on corruption.  The 
popularity of Wijdenbosch as a leader and of Bouterse\'s NDP 
in Paramaribo, where more than half of the population 
resides, is telling; it points to the battle that the New 
Front coalition must wage to capture enough National 
Assembly seats to form a government after the 2005 
elections.    END COMMENT. 
 
BARNES 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"18716","7/14/2004 19:17","04PARAMARIBO515","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03PARAMARIBO77","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  PARAMARIBO 000515 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR: MSEIBEL, AND FOR INR: RCARHART 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, NS, DESI BOUTERSE 
SUBJECT: FORMER MILITARY STRONGMAN DESI BOUTERSE\'S PARTY 
NDP VOTES TO DISSOLVE SURINAME\'S LARGEST OPPOSITION BLOC DUE TO 
INFIGHTING OVER BOUTERSE\'S QUEST FOR THE PRESIDENCY 
 
REFS: (A) 03 PARAMARIBO 413, (B) 03 PARAMARIBO 77 
 
Sensitive but unclassified - please handle accordingly. 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  (U)  Suriname\'s National Democratic Party (NDP), led by 
former military strongman Desi Bouterse, voted to dissolve 
the Millennium Combination, the country\'s largest opposition 
coalition, on July 12.  The move came after NDP\'s two 
coalition partners, Democratic Alternative (DA) and KTPI, 
publicly disparaged NDP\'s nomination of Bouterse for the 
presidency in the upcoming May 2005 elections.  (See Ref. 
A.) The move leaves NDP in control of seven out of the 
National Assembly\'s 51 seats, KTPI two, and Democratic 
Alternative one, and will have little practical effect in 
the National Assembly.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
NDP VOTES TO DISSOLVE THE MILLENNIUM COMBINATION 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
2.  (U)  According to newspaper reports, Suriname\'s National 
Democratic Party (NDP), the party of former military 
strongman Desi Bouterse, voted on July 12 to dissolve the 
Millennium Combination (MC), the country\'s largest 
opposition group, ahead of the May 2005 elections.  Party 
representatives in the National Assembly and members of the 
NDP\'s steering group accepted the recommendation of local 
representatives from various districts made in an 
extraordinary meeting July 9.  This decision leaves NDP in 
control of seven of the National Assembly\'s 51 seats and 
former coalition partners Democratic Alternative (DA) and 
KTPI in control of one and two seats, respectively. 
 
3.  (U)  The move came after leaders of DA and KTPI publicly 
voiced opposition to NDP\'s nomination of Bouterse for the 
Presidency.  (See Ref. A.)  In the June 30 edition of local 
daily Dagblad Suriname, DA\'s chair Djagendre Ramkhelawan 
declared that the NDP did not consult with DA and KTPI about 
Bouterse\'s presidential candidacy.  He expressed surprise 
that NDP would support Bouterse as he had received an 11- 
year prison sentence from a Dutch court in 2000 for 
trafficking 474 kilos of cocaine and had an outstanding 
Interpol arrest warrant.  Ramkelawan also cited Bouterse\'s 
involvement in the December 1982 murders of 15 prominent 
community leaders, the subject of an ongoing investigation. 
(See Ref. B.)  If Bouterse were elected president, the 
international community would isolate Suriname, he said. 
KTPI chair, Willy Soemita echoed his concerns in a July 5 
Radio ABC talk show. 
 
--------- 
REACTIONS 
--------- 
 
4.  (U)  When asked for his reaction, Bouterse said he 
regretted NDP\'s decision but placed blame for the breakup of 
the coalition on Ramkhelawan and Soemita.  He reminded the 
public that the men are seasoned politicians who knew in 
advance that their actions would result in an appropriate 
response by the NDP.  Bouterse noted that the NDP would be 
speaking later with three unnamed political parties to 
explore possible alliances.  NDP Secretary Ramon Abrahams 
took a more diplomatic tact with his declaration that 
Bouterse\'s nomination was not a \"take it or leave it\" for 
the other parties in the MC while emphasizing NDP\'s intent 
to pursue Bouterse\'s nomination. 
 
5.  (U)  Abrahams cited results of a June poll conducted by 
the respected Institute for Development Oriented Studies 
(IDOS) as proof that there is growing support for the NDP. 
18% of 350 respondents in Paramaribo said they would vote 
for NDP, making it the largest party in Paramaribo. 
Abrahams claimed that the IDOS figures indicated that 
supporters of DNP 2000 led by former President Jules 
Wijdenbosch, a former Bouterse ally, are returning home to 
the NDP.  In a similar vein, he dismissed as insignificant, 
the Kankantrie movement led by NDP dissidents who are 
calling on Bouterse to renounce his presidential bid. 
 
6.  (U)  Another senior NDP representative, Henk Kotzebue, 
tempered NDP\'s bravado regarding the elections.  He confided 
to the Embassy that within the NDP talks are being held with 
Bouterse urging him to give way to NDP National Assembly 
Fraction leader Jenny Geerlings-Simons.  Kozebue said that, 
 
by persuading Bouterse to abandon his quest for the 
presidency, the party hopes to attract a large bloc of 
uncommitted voters.   (Note:  The latest IDOS poll indicated 
that 35.1% of respondents in Paramaribo were uncommitted. 
End Note.) 
 
7.  (U)  To date, neither Willy Soemita of KTPI or Djagendre 
Ramkhelawan could be reached for comment.  According to the 
July 12 edition of local daily De Ware Tijd, it is believed 
that these two political parties are in discussions with 
Wijdenbosch\'s DNP 2000 and the new coalition A1. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
8.  (SBU)  NDP\'s decision to dissolve the Millennium 
Combination ten months ahead of the May 2005 elections shows 
the degree to which Bouterse and his supporters are willing 
to go to secure the presidency for Bouterse.  Despite his 
baggage (the December 1982 murders and the 11-year jail 
sentence in absentia), the charismatic Bouterse remains 
popular nationwide.  Bouterse failed in his attempt to 
control the Presidency through former President Jules 
Wijdenbosch in the 1996-2000 NDP government.  Tensions arose 
between the two men, which resulted in Wijdenbosch finally 
bolting from the NDP in 2000 to form his own party, DNP 
2000.  For this reason, Bouterse is not willing to make the 
same mistake again.  Some NDP insiders have told the Embassy 
that Bouterse is intent on getting a second chance at ruling 
the country since Bouterse, they claimed, had unwittingly 
allowed his first attempt at governing during the 1980-1987 
military regime to be hijacked by unruly elements.  There 
is, however, nothing in Bouterse\'s record since 1987 to 
suggest that he has evolved from a strongman to a democrat. 
 
9.  (SBU)  In a country where anything can happen, it is 
still too early to tell what impact the dissolution of the 
Millennium Combination will have on voters.  For now at 
least, the ruling New Front (NF) coalition appears to have 
gained a little ground from the disbanding of the most 
important opposition bloc.  Still, Surinamers are 
disillusioned with the Venetiaan administration\'s management 
of the economy, the slow pace toward development and reform, 
and the widespread perception that the administration has 
accomplished little during its tenure.  This is in spite of 
stabilizing the economy, which will see a 5% growth this 
year.  Surinamers yearn for tangible proof of a government\'s 
endeavors.  The bridges constructed during the Wijdenbosch 
administration remain a source of his continuing popularity. 
While a number of development projects are reportedly in the 
works, the NF coalition government may have waited too long 
to deliver the goods to woo voters in the run up to the 2005 
elections.  End Comment. 
 
BARNES 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"18882","7/19/2004 16:33","04PARAMARIBO523","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","04PARAMARIBO735","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000523 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR -- MSEIBELE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, AORC, NS, OAS 
SUBJECT: SURINAME CLINCHES CARICOM\'S SUPPORT FOR ITS 
CANDIDATE FOR OAS ASSISTANT SECRETARY GENERAL 
 
REF: PARAMARIBO 735 
 
1.  During their July 5-8 meeting in Grenada, CARICOM heads 
of state endorsed the nomination of Surinamese diplomat 
Albert Ramdin for the position of Assistant Secretary 
General of the Organization of the American States.  Ramdin 
is currently the Caribbean Affairs Advisor to OAS Secretary 
General Cesar Gaviria.  Previously, he served as CARICOM\'s 
Assistant Secretary General, as Suriname\'s Ambassador to the 
OAS, and as its non-resident Ambassador to Costa Rica. 
Ramdin told the local daily \"De Ware Tijd\" (DWT) that, if 
elected, his goal is to make the OAS stronger by 
strengthening democracies and by promoting good governance 
and sustainable development. 
 
2.  Upon his return from the CARICOM meeting, President 
Ronald Venetiaan declared that Suriname will work hard to 
secure enough support for Ramdin\'s candidacy in elections to 
be held during the next OAS General meeting in June 2005 in 
Ft. Lauderdale.  When asked for her reactions to the news, 
Nalini Sewpersadsing, the MFA\'s International Organizations 
Deputy Director, told the Embassy that she hopes that the 
Central American countries would support Suriname\'s nominee. 
She confirmed that, at this early juncture, Ramdin is the 
only declared candidate for the Assistant Secretary General 
position.  However, Sewpersadsingh noted that Paraguay may 
also submit a nomination.  Notably, Venetiaan\'s personal 
secretary Hesdy Pigot told the Embassy he had heard about 
 
SIPDIS 
the U.S.\'s lack of enthusiasm for Ramdin\'s candidacy but he 
declined to comment further on the matter. 
 
BARNES 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"18890","7/19/2004 19:07","04PARAMARIBO527","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  PARAMARIBO 000527 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
WHA/PD - APRUITT, MJOHNSON, ECA/PE/C/CU - SROUSE, WHA/CAR - 
MSEIBEL 
POSTS FOR PAOS/CAOS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO, SOCI, NS 
SUBJECT: JAZZ AMBASSADORS THRILL CROWDS IN SURINAME, HELP 
EMBASSY SEND THE MESSAGE THAT SURINAME MATTERS TO THE U.S. 
 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.  On July 8-11, the Embassy hosted Jazz Ambassadors 
Deborah Davis and a Few Good Men in the first ever visit of 
a Jazz Ambassadors group to Suriname.  The dynamic quartet 
thrilled school children in a workshop entitled \"What is 
Jazz?,\" invitees to a private concert at the Ambassador\'s 
residence, patrons of a local nightclub with a guest 
appearance, and the wider public during a Saturday night 
concert.  Judging from the tremendous outpouring of support, 
the Jazz Ambassadors visit was a tremendous success that 
left audiences craving for more Embassy-sponsored cultural 
programs.  In turn, the Jazz Ambassadors welcomed the 
opportunity to experience Suriname\'s cultural diversity with 
a visit to a Maroon village.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
FIRST-EVER VISIT OF JAZZ AMBASSADORS TO SURINAME 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
2.  Jazz Ambassadors Deborah Davis and A Few Good Men paid a 
visit to Suriname on July 8-11, the first ever such visit of 
a Jazz Ambassadors group.  Paramaribo was the first stop in 
a seven-country tour, which also includes stops in Guyana, 
Venezuela, Paraguay, Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico. 
Surinamers eagerly awaited their visit as interest in jazz 
is growing; last year, the country held its first jazz 
festival.  In addition, Surinamers have long urged the 
Embassy to carry out more cultural programming and have 
repeatedly expressed their regret over the closing of USIS 
in the mid 1990s. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
REACHING OUT TO THE SUCCESSOR GENERATION 
---------------------------------------- 
 
3.  On July 9, the first day of their two-day program, the 
Jazz Ambassadors conducted a workshop entitled \"What is 
Jazz?\" for fifty music students and teachers from two junior 
high schools, Calor and Asin, with which the Embassy has an 
active outreach program.  The group provided an informal 
overview of the history and elements of jazz and explained 
the importance of improvization.  The Jazz Ambassadors also 
impressed the students with several songs, which led one 
student who believed that jazz is meant for mature audiences 
to declare, \"I never knew jazz sounded like that.\"  To the 
Embassy\'s delight, one radio announcer present at the 
workshop expressed his amazement at the group\'s high caliber 
over the air. 
 
----------------- 
WOWING THE CROWDS 
----------------- 
 
4.  Later that evening the Jazz Ambassadors performed a 
concert for 80 of Suriname\'s most prominent government 
officials, politicians, entrepreneurs, and other notables, 
including First Lady Liesbeth Venetiaan.  At the 
Ambassador\'s residence, their presentation elicited nodding 
heads, tapping feQ, a standing ovation, and rounds of 
applause from those assembled.  Many invitees later 
expressed their gratitude to the Embassy for the rare treat. 
A prominent surgeon who is a jazz aficionado stressed that 
it was important for Surinamers to hear what music of the 
highest caliber sounds like so that they can aspire to 
perform at that level.  Others echoed his sentiments at 
Rumors, Suriname\'s premier jazz club, during the Jazz 
Ambassadors\' guest appearance there. 
 
5.  The following night the Jazz Ambassadors performed for a 
maximum crowd of 550 at the Torarica hotel.  According to 
the group, the crowd\'s positive reactions exceeded their 
expectations.  They noted that, when Davis indicated that 
the show was over, the crowd chanted \"no\" several times and 
remained standing in place until Davis and the group 
returned to the stage.  Given this tremendous outpouring of 
support, Davis and the group performed an additional three 
songs and shared with the crowd their appreciation for the 
crowd\'s support, which they said made the visit to Suriname, 
their first stop, memorable. 
 
------------------------- 
 
 
VISIT TO A MAROON VILLAGE 
------------------------- 
 
6.  Before their departure, the Jazz Ambassadors visited 
Santigron, a Maroon village located one hour away from the 
capital.  (Note:  Maroons are descendants of slaves who fled 
into the jungle to escape slavery.  End Note.)  The group 
toured the village, listened to an impromptu drum 
presentation, and saw a traditional dance performed by 
children.  The group met with a singer and a village captain 
and his wife who asked Davis to sing for them.  For her 
efforts, Davis received approval and a bear hug from the 
captain\'s wife.  The group welcomed this unique experience, 
which one member described as a visit within a visit -- an 
unexpected stop in Africa here in Suriname -- and expressed 
general wonder at Suriname\'s culturally diverse population. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
7.  The Jazz Ambassadors\' visit to Suriname was an 
unqualified success.  At a time when the U.S. is pressing 
the GOS to take a number of actions which do not have public 
support, e.g. Article 98, road realignment, this display of 
\"soft power\" was a welcome indication that the U.S. cares 
about Suriname.  Suriname remains a somewhat difficult 
public diplomacy environment given Surinamers\' tendency to 
oppose U.S. foreign policy and to question U.S. motives. 
Suriname is of particular interest to us given its sizeable 
Muslim population, its membership in the Organization of 
American States, and its potential energy reserves, Embassy 
would like to make a Jazz Ambassadors visit an annual event. 
It is a good investment.  Embassy highly recommends Deborah 
Davis and a Few Good Men for future State Department- 
sponsored appearances given their musical talents and their 
ability to mix well with locals.  Embassy also thanks Sandra 
Rouse, Audrey Pruitt, and WHA/PD for making the initiative 
possible.  End Comment. 
 
BARNES 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"18934","7/20/2004 18:03","04PARAMARIBO529","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","03PARAMARIBO520","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000529 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, SOCI, NS 
SUBJECT: SURINAME TO CONDUCT NEW CENSUS IN AUGUST 
 
REFS: (A) 02 PARAMARIBO 1171; (B) 03 PARAMARIBO 520 
 
1.  According to Surinamese media reports, the National 
Assembly unanimously approved legislation on July 8 to 
permit the conduct of a new census in August.  The census 
will be undertaken by the General Statistics Bureau (ABS) 
August 2-15 and will be financed by the government and the 
Inter American Development Bank.  Eline Ritfield, a member 
of the ABS census team, told the Embassy that her team hopes 
to have preliminary results from the census ready the first 
week in October.  Census data is particularly important for 
Suriname as the results would be the first obtained since 
1980 and would include information on the ethnicities and 
nationalities of Suriname\'s residents. (See Ref. A.) 
 
2.  The results of a census conducted last year, along with 
some of the country\'s economic, social, and labor 
statistics, were lost in an August 5, 2003, fire.  The media 
first blamed the fire on homeless people but police later 
arrested two young men, including the son of a crony of 
former military strongman Desi Bouterse, for the incident. 
(See Ref. B.)  The loss of valuable census data caused an 
uproar, as no safety measures had been taken. Planning and 
Development Cooperation Stanley Raghoebarsing promised the 
National Assembly that the new census results would be 
better protected.  He noted that, in addition to the 
security provided by the police and fire brigade, the 
government plans to hire a private security company to 
provide ABS offices with extra protection.  In addition, 
discussions regarding a computer backup system are ongoing. 
 
BARNES 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"19130","7/27/2004 13:10","04PARAMARIBO545","Embassy Paramaribo","UNCLASSIFIED","03PARAMARIBO421|04PARAMARIBO270|04PARAMARIBO307","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS PARAMARIBO 000545 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR -- MSEIBEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, SOCI, CH, NS, CHINA 
SUBJECT: CHINESE DELEGATION VISIT TO SURINAME: JUST REGULAR 
BUSINESS? 
 
REFS: (A) PARAMARIBO 307, (B) 03 PARAMARIBO 421, (C) 
PARAMARIBO 270 
 
1.  In a July 22 conversation with the Embassy, Political 
Officer Yumin Zhao of the Chinese Embassy downplayed a 
recent visit by a delegation from the Peoples National 
Congress to Suriname.  Zhao stressed that the July 6-9 
visit was part of a regular orientation of Chinese 
government officials to the region -Q Suriname was the 
delegations\' first stop on an introductory tour to seven 
countries. He added that the visit did not break new 
ground. 
 
2.  According to media reports, the delegation discussed 
the warm relations enjoyed between Suriname and China with 
Ram Sardjoe (Speaker of the National Assembly), Marie 
Levens (Foreign Affairs Minister), and Jules Ajodhia (then 
Acting President).  Issues covered included the 
controversial Patamacca palm oil project (See Ref A), a 
road paving program, construction of a new Foreign Affairs 
building, the immigration and trafficking of Chinese to 
Suriname, and a reported $18 million soft loan promised to 
President Ronald Venetiaan during his state visit to China 
last year.  According to Minister of Trade and Industry 
Michael Jong Tjien Fa, the loan is earmarked for the 
construction of 1,000 houses in districts Wanica 
(population about 90,000) and Commewijne (population about 
60,000) districts.  In addition, Jong Tjien Fa credited the 
good relations between Suriname and China to the Chinese 
diaspora in Suriname -- Chinese first came to Suriname more 
than 150 years ago.  For his part, Jiang Zhenghua, the head 
of the Chinese delegation, thanked Suriname for its support 
of the \"one China\" policy. (See Refs B and C for further 
details about Suriname-China relations.) 
 
3.  When asked for his take on the visit, President Ronald 
Venetiaan\'s personal secretary Hesdy Pigot dismissed rumors 
that Suriname will permit the immigration of a significant 
number of Chinese nationals.  He emphasized that only the 
Chinese companies in charge of the proposed housing project 
will be able to bring in the necessary workers.  These 
workers will return to China once the project is completed, 
he said.  (Note:  A credible source confided to the Embassy 
that, according to National Assembly members working on the 
state visit, the delegation explored the possible 
immigration of thousands of Chinese to Suriname.  Embassy 
has been unable to date to confirm whether this in fact 
occurred.  End Note) 
 
BARNES 
 
 
NNNN 
"