
"13220","1/13/2004 10:00","04LJUBLJANA85","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04CDRUSEUCOMALTSHAPEBE131000ZJAN4","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 000085 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE, EUR/RPM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR, PREL, PGOV, PINR, SI, NATO 
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR VISIT OF GEN JAMES L. JONES, SACEUR 
 
REF: CDR USEUCOM ALT SHAPE BE 131000Z JAN 04 
 
1.  (SBU) While you will be wearing your NATO hat during your 
11-12 February visit to Slovenia, you may wish to emphasize 
the following shared U.S. and NATO priorities during your 
discussions with Slovenian officials: 
 
-- Slovenia\'s bilateral and NATO commitment to bring defense 
spending to 2% of GDP by 2008; 
 
-- increased Slovenian contributions to Operation Enduring 
Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom; 
 
-- Slovenian efforts to share the country\'s successful 
transition experience with others in the region; 
 
-- staying the course on military reform and 
professionalization. 
 
--------------------- 
Political Environment 
--------------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) Your visit will include a meeting with President 
Janez Drnovsek, among Slovenia\'s most powerful politicians 
for the last fifteen years.  Drnovsek hand picked Anton 
\"Tone\" Rop to succeed him as Prime Minister when Drnovsek won 
the Presidency in December 2002.  Since becoming Prime 
Minister, Rop\'s relationship with Drnovsek has deteriorated 
some as Rop increasingly governed according to his (vice 
Drnovsek\'s) desires.  With the lessening of Drnovsek\'s direct 
support, Rop faced challenges from contemporaries within 
their party (LDS), from contenders in other governing 
coalition parties (including ZLSD\'s Borut Pahor), and from 
the opposition.  This, combined with his inexperience in 
foreign affairs, restricted his ability to be helpful on 
domestically unpopular issues such as Iraq and the ICC. 
Although Rop has successfully consolidated his control of the 
LDS, it is not clear whether he or the governing coalition 
will survive the Fall 2004 parliamentary elections.  However, 
it is unlikely that Slovenia\'s foreign policy will change 
dramatically no matter who wins. 
 
---------------- 
Defense Spending 
---------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) PM Rop has committed to honor Drnovsek\'s May 2002 
pledge to President Bush to increase Slovenian defense 
spending to 2% of GDP by 2008.  This pledge also was made 
directly to NATO in Slovenia\'s Timetable for Completion of 
Reforms.  However, an EU-mandated change to GDP calculation 
methodology caused Slovenia to miss its 2003 interim defense 
spending target.  The 2003 shortfall can be excused as an 
unexpected accounting change.  However, a GoS failure to 
adjust defense spending levels to the new GDP methodology in 
the 2004 and draft 2005 budgets has Slovenia likely to miss 
its 2004 and 2005 targets as well.  We are concerned that 
continued shortfalls will make it extremely difficult for 
Slovenia to honor its promise to NATO and to President Bush. 
We are also concerned that the combination of 
professionalization costs and lower spending levels could 
affect Slovenia\'s ability to meet its force goals. 
 
------- 
OIF/OEF 
------- 
 
4.  (SBU) Slovenia was voiciferously not a part of the Iraq 
Coalition due to profound public opposition to the war, but 
granted humanitarian overflights and sent a liaison officer 
to CENTCOM.  Once fighting subsided, the GoS offered 
humanitarian assistance to children through UNICEF and the 
Human Security Network, and demining assistance through its 
International Trust Fund.  Under the political cover provided 
by UNSCR 1483, the GoS approved broad overflights/transit on 
11 June.  At the Madrid conference, Slovenia donated an 
additional US$440,000 in police training and other 
reconstruction assistance.  Many Slovenian companies who 
worked in Iraq in the Yugoslav era hope to recoup old debts 
and to win reconstruction contracts.  Following passage of 
UNSCR 1511, we have been encouraging the GoS to offer 
 
additional support for security and stability in Iraq. 
 
5.  (SBU) The GoS originally committed to deploy a 17-person 
special forces unit to ISAF IV in Afghanistan. 
Unfortunately, this was delayed because a civil service 
employees union\'s legal challenge to standard security 
questionnaires caused the Constitutional Court to freeze all 
NATO security clearance processing.  The GoS proactively 
resolved this problem by amending the law on classified 
information to address the union\'s court complaint and the 
unit had been scheduled to begin deployment on 09 February. 
However, the GoS is now delaying deployment until March, in 
response to an explicit request from Kabul.  We continue to 
encourage the Government to consider additional OEF 
contributions. 
 
------------------ 
Regional Stability 
------------------ 
 
6.  (SBU) For most of the past decade, NATO and EU membership 
have been Slovenia\'s priority foreign policy goals.  Once 
membership in both organizations was assured, the political 
elites searched for their new purpose.  There appears to be a 
growing consensus that the new priority is to help guide the 
rest of Southeast Europe along that same path, as quickly as 
possible.  This reflects both political and economic national 
interest -- Southeast Europe is Slovenia\'s 
second-most-important market, supplementing EU-generated 
income and balancing Slovenia\'s dependence on the health of 
the western European economy.  Slovenia therefore has the 
potential to be one of our most capable, motivated, and 
reliable allies in bringing peace, stability, and prosperity 
to the troubled Balkans region. 
 
7.  (SBU) The GoS strongly supports eventual NATO and EU 
membership for Croatia and the other former Yugoslav 
republics and seeks to be NATO and the EU\'s in-house Balkans 
expert. Slovenia is the region\'s largest foreign investor, 
and plays a leading role in Balkan demining efforts, 
humanitarian assistance, and peacekeeping operations. 
Slovenia also promotes regional law enforcement cooperation 
on combating cross-border criminal activities and provides a 
wealth of technical assistance on economic, political, and 
judicial reforms. 
 
8.  (SBU) Slovenia joined the OSCE Troika on 01 January and 
will be Chairman in Office for 2005.  In this role, the GoS 
plans to focus on promoting political and economic reforms in 
Southeast Europe, the Causasus, and Central Asia, building on 
Slovenia\'s own successful transition experience. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Military Reform/Professionalization 
----------------------------------- 
 
9.  (SBU) Slovenia will bring valued assets to the Alliance, 
by exporting peace and stability in this troubled region, by 
achieving its force proposals/goals, and by further 
developing its declared niche capabilities (mountain 
training, explosive ordinance disposal, military police and 
peacekeeping units, and military field medicine).  Under 
Defense Minister Grizold\'s capable leadership, Slovenian 
military reforms are proceeding well, but full implementation 
will require continued and determined effort and increasing 
defense resources.  Key MAP goals are:  operationalizing the 
10th Motorized Battallion, developing an NBC battalion, 
logistics support for deployable forces, NCO corps 
development, and personnel management reform.  The GoS will 
fully professionalize its active duty military by the end of 
2004 and the reserves by 2010. 
 
10.  (SBU) In a 23 March 2003 referendum, 66% of the 
Slovenian electorate voted to join NATO after an intense GoS 
public information campaign.  However, it is not clear 
whether the Government has a long term strategy to maintain 
this level of public support.  Professionalization of the 
military and the recent end to conscription have enjoyed wide 
popularity. 
 
------------ 
Other Issues 
 
------------ 
 
11.  (SBU) Croatia:  Slovenia\'s relations with Croatia 
resemble those of siblings -- basically good, with many minor 
irritants.  Last August, Croatia unilaterally declared its 
intention to establish an Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) off 
its Adriatic Coast, which would directly affect Slovenian 
fishing and shipping.  The surprise decision resulted in a 
flurry of stiffly worded diplomatic notes, the Slovenian 
Ambassador to Croatia returning briefly to Ljubljana for 
\"consultations,\" and the reappearance of resentments over 
Croatia\'s failure to sign and ratify the bilateral maritime 
border demarcation agreement.  Slovenia has been pursuing 
resolution of the matter calmly, via EU and bilateral 
diplomatic channels.  Both the GoS and the GoC appear 
interested in taking the opportunity provided by the Croatian 
change in leadership to approach these issues from a fresh 
perspective.  We are studiously avoiding being drawn into the 
discussions or commenting publicly on the issue. 
 
12.  (SBU) ICC/Article 98 Agreements:  A founding ICC member, 
Slovenia believes strongly in the Court and would like to 
bring the U.S. onboard.  The GoS understands the practical 
need to resolve the Art. 98 issue, but is unlikely to sign an 
agreement unless a prominent EU member does so first.  With 
the majority of the electorate forcefully opposed to Art. 98 
Agreements, ratification would be extremely difficult, 
particularly as the 2004 elections draw closer.  The recent 
Presidential ASPA waiver decision received moderate but 
positive press coverage. 
 
13.  (SBU) Terrorism:  One of the first countries to join the 
Global Coalition against Terrorism, Slovenia has supported it 
through humanitarian, demining, military, and police training 
assistance to Afghanistan.  Slovenia has ratified 11 of 12 
anti-terrorism conventions, with ratification of the last 
awaiting passage of technical amendments to the Criminal Code 
which are currently before parliament.  Slovenia has an 
excellent international reputation in combating terrorist 
financing and money laundering, is highly supportive of U.S. 
efforts in this regard, and is actively mentoring Ukraine, 
Russia, and the former Yugoslav republics. 
 
14.  (SBU) EU:  For the average Slovene, national economic 
interests take priority over all other policy issues, and 
those interests lie in Europe.  Slovenia\'s top four trading 
partners are Germany, Italy, Croatia, and France.  Total 
trade with the EU is estimated at nearly US$6.1 billion, or 
59% of all exports.  (Only 3% of exports go to the U.S.)  EU 
membership was supported by 91% of the electorate in the 23 
March referendum and enjoys the backing of virtually every 
political party.  Janez Potocnik, the Minister for European 
Affairs, the lead EU negotiator, and the nominee to be 
Slovenia\'s first Commissioner, is one of the most popular and 
widely-trusted politicians in the country.  Prior to the 
Copenhagen Summit, Slovenia sensibly toed the EU policy line 
on almost all issues of importance, voicing dissent only in 
cases where there were clear differences of opinion within 
the EU and where there was safety in numbers (Bilateral 
Investment Treaties, for example).  Fiercely independent by 
nature, we expect the Slovenes to gradually 
become less reluctant to push opposing points of view as 
their participation in EU decision-making processes expands. 
While generally supportive of ESDP, Slovenia opposes any 
duplication of NATO structures. 
 
15.  (SBU) Export Controls:  The GoS continues to address 
dual use export control licensing weaknesses and is 
conducting industry outreach and training, with USG support. 
However, it is not clear whether the new interministerial 
body tasked with overseeing dual use export policy is 
achieving all the practical results its well-intentioned 
chair, SOVA Director Iztok Podbregar, would like to see. 
 
16.  (SBU) Privatization/FDI:  The GoS has been reluctant to 
privatize a number of key industries including 
telecommunications, insurance, and banking.  The state exerts 
significant influence over these sectors either as a direct 
owner or as a majority shareholder through a combination of 
state-owned funds.  Although its figures improved 
substantially last year as a result of Swiss-owned Novartis\' 
acquisition of Lek Pharmaceuticals for nearly US$900 million, 
 
Slovenia\'s cumulative FDI, at nearly US$3.2 billion, is one 
of the lowest of all acceding countries. 
 
17.  (SBU) Transparency/red tape:  Transparency International 
ranked Slovenia 29th in its 2003 corruption perception index. 
  Generally, the executive, legislative, and judicial 
branches follow budget law procedures and the system is 
fairly efficient and transparent.  However, there is a lack 
of consistency in public tenders and in the privatization 
process.  In some cases tenders have been cancelled or 
privatization commissions have rejected all bids without 
providing clear explanations.  Byzantine permitting processes 
complicate business start-up/expansion and offer multiple 
opportunities for interference by state monopolies and other 
competitors.  Overall, Slovenia enjoys a high level of fiscal 
transparency and accountability. 
 
18.  (SBU) Trafficking in Persons:  A Tier II country, 
Slovenia needs to pass a law specifically criminalizing 
trafficking, establish victim/witness protection, improve 
victims\' assistance (including setting up sufficient 
shelters), and collect better statistics on the problem. 
 
------------------ 
General Background 
------------------ 
 
19.  (SBU) Slovenia has a well-functioning multi-party 
democracy, an independent judiciary, a free press, an 
excellent human rights record and solid civilian control of 
the military.  The country has an impressive record of 
sustained, broad-based economic growth and its citizens enjoy 
a relatively high standard of living (per capita GDP is 
around US$10,000).  We share strong, cooperative relations on 
a broad range of issues and have worked together closely to 
promote stability and political and economic reform in the 
Balkans.  However, there has been overwhelming public 
opposition to U.S. policy on Iraq and the ICC.  Slovenia has 
contributed personnel to IFOR, SFOR, KFOR and various UN 
missions in the Balkans and elsewhere, and provided crucial 
overflight clearances for NATO\'s Kosovo campaign.  As a UN 
Security Council member in 1998-9, Slovenia supported U.S. 
positions on tough issues, such as Iraq sanctions. 
 
20.  (SBU) President Bush met with then-PM Drnovsek in 
Washington on May 17, 2002 and in Ljubljana during his June 
2001 summit with Russian President Putin.  President Clinton 
visited Ljubljana in June 1999.  National Assembly President 
Borut Pahor\'s 09-11 June trip to Washington was the first 
time he had traveled outside of Europe.  SecDef Rumsfeld 
visited Slovenia immediately after the November 2002 Prague 
NATO Summit; in early December, Congressman Bereuter came 
here in his capacity as Chair of the NATO Parliamentary 
Assembly; and, two bilateral Congressional delegations (Holt 
and Hastert) have traveled to Ljubljana in the past year.  PM 
Rop wishes to visit Washington as soon as possible. 
 
21.  (SBU) On December 23, 1990 an overwhelming majority of 
the Slovenian electorate voted in a plebiscite to separate 
from greater Yugoslavia; independence was officially declared 
on June 25, 1991.  The U.S. formally recognized Slovenia as 
an independent state on April 7, 1992 and opened an embassy 
in Ljubljana in August of that year.  Slovenia became a 
member of the UN in May 1992 and of the Council of Europe in 
May 1993.  Slovenia is scheduled to join the EU and NATO in 
May and June 2004, respectively, and will assume the OSCE 
Chairmanship in Office in 2005.  Slovenia is a member of all 
major financial institutions, as well as 40 other 
international organizations including the World Trade 
Organization. 
 
 
YOUNG 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"13502","1/26/2004 13:30","04LJUBLJANA59","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SECSTATE6662","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 000059 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, SI, WTO 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: ZOELLICK\'S LETTER: \"CONSTRUCTIVE AND 
PRAGMATIC\" 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 06662 
 
     B. LJUBLJANA 030 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified.  Please protect accordingly. 
 
1. (SBU) On 20 January, Econoff and Econ Specialist followed 
up an earlier conversation with Dmirtij Grcar, State 
Undersecretary for Multilateral Affairs at the Ministry of 
the Economy, examining Ambassador Zoellick\'s letter to his 
ministerial counterparts (ref A).  Reaching into his drawer 
and pulling out the letter with notes scribbled on the 
margins, as well as a five page summary of points, Grcar 
proceeded to explain his views.  He noted that he was 
\"surprised\" by the European Commission\'s comments on the 
letter thus far.  \"I am surprised that the Commission is 
surprised that a letter came, but also by its overall 
lukewarm reception of the proposals included.\"  Grcar credits 
the Commission\'s tepid reaction to the letter\'s content to a 
\"concern that the U.S. is backtracking from the joint 
agreements made prior to and during Cancun.\"  The Commission 
will continue to hold fast to the notion of the Singapore 
issues because it has to show something in return for making 
agricultural concessions, Grcar commented.  Gcrar was not 
forthcoming, however, sharing the Commission\'s view in light 
of the missive.  \"The Commission does not allow any 
discussion about tactics and strateg,\" Grcar said. 
 
2.  (SBU)  For his part, Grcar dscribed the letter as 
\"constructive and pragmati\" considering that many government 
officials andtrade observers were pessimistic about this 
years trade discussions as a result of the Cancun debace, 
U.S. elections, and EU enlargement.  \"The leter is very 
positive because it lays out a vision placing the most 
contentious issue -- agricultue -- at the top of the list. 
There is no doubt tat we have to deal with agricultural 
issues if we want to move the trade agenda forward,\" Grcar 
noed.  He was in complete agreement with the letter\' call 
to support and to promote \"South-South\" trde and to increase 
the participation and the invlvement of capitals in the 
process.  In his view, the letter fails to address the type 
of \"defensie mechanisms\" allowable as trade restrictions 
diappear; the manner by which food assistance progras may 
be conducted; and, a mechanism to phase ou and to deal with 
export grants.  He was quick to point out, however, that 
those are issues that my be engaged upon once negotiations 
get back on rack.  The re-start of negotiations is the key. 
rcar was adamant that a return to the negotiation table was 
vital, but also recommended that the \"important world trade 
players\" devise a \"manageable mechanism\" to ensure the 
progress of the Doha Development Agenda (DDA), without 
falling victim to \"single-issue\" interests. 
 
3.  (SBU)  Grcar was highly critical of the current WTO 
leadership, remarking that it is imperative that the 
Secretary General act as a catalyst and earn the respect of 
 
SIPDIS 
large and small countries alike.  Although not openly 
advocating for the current WTO Secretary\'s resignation, Grcar 
contrasted the work done by previous GATT and WTO 
Directors-General who \"were unwilling to succumb to pressures 
and kept the discussions alive.\"  Not only does Grcar see the 
need for a more dynamic Secretary, but also advocated 
strongly in favor of reforming the institution\'s 
policy-making structures.  \"Cancun proved that we need to 
reform the WTO policy making mechanism.  There are countries 
that come to the table with serious offers and ideas, while 
there are others, that due to their limited capacity, cannot 
keep up and adjust to changing situations rapidly. 
Overwhelmed, these countries proceed to block any measure -- 
no matter what it may be -- because they cannot follow and 
understand the arguments and proposals.\"  He suggested that 
the WTO establish working groups to facilitate discussions 
and negotiations.  Upon reaching agreement, the working group 
would present the results to the entire membership for 
further action.  In Grcar\'s view, the WTO would \"cease to 
become relevant\" if it could not undertake and complete 
\"serious negotiations.\" 
 
4. (SBU) COMMENT:  Grcar\'s positive reaction to Zoellick\'s 
letter reflects the importance the GoS places on developing 
international trade in a multilateral framework, and 
Slovenia\'s traditional \"bottom line approach.\"  Grcar\'s calls 
for an active WTO leadership, a working group arrangement, 
and a concrete agenda embody the Slovenes\' desire to 
reinvigorate international trade talks.  Because of 
Slovenia\'s dependency on international trade and its 
commitment to multilateral fora, we can expect the GoS to be 
receptive and supportive of initiatives and measures 
fomenting trade and empowering multilateral institutions as 
long as it doesn\'t have to lock horns with the European 
 
 
Commission.  END COMMENT. 
YOUNG 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"13504","1/26/2004 13:36","04LJUBLJANA61","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS LJUBLJANA 000061 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR PRM, EUR/NCE, EUR/SCE, IO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID, PREF, PGOV, SI, UNHCR 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: PRM A/S DEWEY\'S LETTER TO UNHCR DONORS 
DELIVERED 
 
 
    REF: SECSTATE 13118 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  PLEASE PROTECT ACCORDINGLY. 
 
1.  (U) ON 23 JANUARY, ECONOFF DELIVERED PRM A/S DEWEY\'S 
LETTER TO DONORS WHO PLEDGED CONTRIBUTIONS TO UNHCR\'S 2004 
PROGRAM TO MARJAN SETINC, MFA STATE UNDERSECRETARY FOR 
DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION AND HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE.  SETINC 
WELCOMED THE A/S\'S LETTER AND NOTED THAT THE UNHCR WILL 
REMAIN ONE OF SLOVENIA\'S PRIMARY DESTINATIONS OF DEVELOPMENT 
AND HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE -- UNDP AND UNICEF BEING THE 
OTHER TWO.  ALTHOUGH HE DID NOT PROVIDE ACTUAL PLEDGE 
AMOUNTS, SETINC REPORTED THAT HIS OFFICE WILL LIKELY OPERATE 
WITH A US $800,000 BUDGET FOR 2004 -- A US $300,000 INCREASE 
FROM 2003. 
 
2.  (SBU)  SETINC EXPLAINED THAT THE FORMER YUGOSLAV 
FEDERATION REGION WILL REMAIN THE FOCUS OF SLOVENIA\'S 
DEVELOPMENT AND HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS.  HOWEVER, 
HE EXPRESSED CONCERN AND DISAPPOINTMENT OVER THE \"REGION\'S 
INABILITY TO SETTLE OPEN ISSUES AND TO OVERCOME ROADBLOCKS TO 
A PERMANENT SETTLEMENT.\"  HE WAS ACUTELY CONCERNED OVER THE 
FUTURE OF KOSOVO FOLLOWING THE RECENT SERBIAN PARLIAMENTARY 
ELECTIONS.  \"THE FUTURE OF KOSOVO IS THE KEY TO SUCCESS IN 
SETTLING A NUMBER OF OPEN ISSUES.  THE DISPUTES BETWEEN 
ALBANIANS AND MACEDONIANS WILL NOT BE RESOLVED UNLESS 
PROGRESS IS MADE ON THE ISSUE OF KOSOVO,\" SETINC COMMENTED. 
 
3.  (SBU)  A COURTESY COPY OF REFTEL LETTER WAS ALSO PROVIDED 
TO LOCAL UNHCR REPRESENTATIVE GREG GARRAS, WHO EXPRESSED 
PROFUSE GRATITUDE FOR WASHINGTON\'S INITIATIVE, REMARKING \"OUR 
    HEADQUARTERS DOESN\'T ALWAYS APPRECIATE THE IMPORTANCE THOSE 
KIND OF POLITICAL GESTURES HAVE, BUT IT MAKES A HUGE 
DIFFERENCE IN OUR FUNDRAISING EFFORTS.  IT\'S GREAT THAT THE 
ASSISTANT SECRETARY WAS WILLING TO DO SOMETHING LIKE THAT. 
EVEN IF GENEVA DOESN\'T APPRECIATE IT, THOSE OF US IN THE 
FIELD DO.\" 
YOUNG 
 
NNNN 
"
"13776","2/6/2004 13:06","04LJUBLJANA92","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04LJUBLJANA69","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS LJUBLJANA 000092 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE, OES/OA 
LONDON FOR US IMO PERMREP EVANS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EWWT, PHSA, SENV, SI, IMO 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: IMO BALLAST WATER TREATY 
 
REFTEL: A) LJUBLJANA 0069 
 
        B) SECSTATE 013847 
 
    SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  PLEASE PROTECT 
ACCORDINGLY. 
 
1. (SBU) ON 04 FEBRUARY, ECON SPECIALIST FOLLOWED UP 
REF A INQUIRY WITH BRANKO MAHNE, STATE UNDERSECRETARY 
AT THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT, DETERMINING THE GOS 
POSITION ON REF B POINTS AND DRAFT PROPOSAL FOR A 
BALLAST WATER DISCHARGE STANDARD IN REGULATION D-2 OF 
THE INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION FOR THE CONTROL AND 
MANAGEMENT OF SHIPS\' BALLAST WATER AND SEDIMENTS. 
UNOFFICIALLY, MAHNE REPORTED THAT \"SLOVENIA WOULD BE 
SUPPORTIVE OF THE U.S. POSITION,\" BUT THAT HE COULD NOT 
OFFICIALLY SAY AS MUCH, SINCE THE \"INTRA-MINISTERIAL 
PROCESS HAD NOT YET BEEN COMPLETED.\"  (NOTE:  THE 
MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT SOLICITS THE OPINION OF TWO FIELD 
EXPERTS, UNIVERSITY OF KOPER\'S PROFESSORS DAVID AND 
PAVLIHA, TO FORMULATE ITS POSITION.  END NOTE). 
 
2.  (SBU) COMMENT:  WE EXPECT THE GOS OFFICIAL POSITION 
TO BE SUPPORTIVE OF OUR POSITION AS LONG AS IT IS LINE 
WITH OTHER EU MEMBERS STATES, SINCE THIS IS NOT A 
PRIORITY ISSUE FOR IT.  END COMMENT. 
 
YOUNG 
 
NNNN 
"
"15532","3/31/2004 12:12","04LJUBLJANA265","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04LJUBLJANA106","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 000265 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, SI 
SUBJECT:  HEALTH, INTERIOR MINISTERS SURVIVE INTERPELLATION, 
PEOPLES PARTY MAY NOT 
 
REF:  LJUBLJANA 0106 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY:  Opposition-launched motions for the removal 
of Health Minister Dusan Keber and Interior Minister Rado 
Bohinc were debated by the National Assembly on 29 March and 
30 March, respectively.  Keber retained his position by a 47- 
28 vote, along party lines.  Bohinc survived by a 46-30 vote. 
The Peoples Party (SLS), a junior governing coalition member, 
abstained rather than following through on its earlier public 
threats to support the interpellation motions.  One LDS 
deputy crossed party lines to vote for Bohinc\'s removal.  In 
the end, SLS is likely to suffer the most from the escapade. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
----- 
Keber 
----- 
 
2.  (U) On 27 February, the opposition Slovenian Democratic 
Party (SDS) and New Slovenia Party (NSi) filed a motion for 
the interpellation of Health Minister Dusan Keber accusing 
him of \"apparant violations of legislation.\"  The motion was 
supported immediately by the Slovenian National Party (SNS) 
and soon thereafter by the opposition Youth Party (SMS). 
Three of the four governing coalition parties -- the Liberal 
Democratic Party (LDS), the United List of Social Democrats 
(ZLSD), and the Pensioners Party (DeSUS) -- stood behind 
Keber.  The Peoples Party (SLS); however, publicly vacillated 
for over a month, claiming it would decide based on Keber\'s 
responses to the accusations. 
 
3.  (U) The National Assembly considered the SDS/NSi 
interpellation motion on 29 March in a day-long debate 
conducted as part of its regular March session.  Among other 
complaints, SDS and NSi accused Keber of selling the Trnovo 
Hospital at an undervalued price, overspending for MoH 
offices, delay unduly in building a much-needed pediatric 
clinic, involvement in a highly questionable tender for the 
purchase of operating tables for Klinicni Center -- the main 
hospital in Ljubljana, and a poor performance in preparing an 
exhaustive health reform package.  Keber refuted all 
accusations -- some more convincingly than others -- and said 
that attacks on the reform were expected since it changes 
current situation. 
 
4.  (U) The vote at day\'s end was along party lines and its 
outcome was no surprise.  Twenty-eight opposition deputies 
voted in favor of the interpellation motion.  Forty-seven 
deputies supported Keber\'s retention by voting against the 
motion.  All ten SLS deputies abstained from voting, despite 
the party\'s many public hints that it would support the 
interpellation. 
 
------ 
Bohinc 
------ 
 
5. (U) Also on 27 February, the SDS filed an interpellation 
motion against Interior Minister Rado Bohinc (ZLSD) because 
of his \"inadequate\" implementation of the April 2003 
Constitutional Court decision regarding the \"erased\" 
(reftel).  On 01 March SNS announced its grudging support for 
the \"badly drafted\" SDS motion and on 02 March, NSi decided 
to back it as well.  LDS and ZLSD immediately voiced 
opposition to Bohinc\'s removal, with DeSus eventually 
following suit.  On 22 March, junior coalition party SLS made 
headlines when it announced it would back the SDS motion 
against Bohinc, despite public warnings on the consequences 
of such a decision from PM Rop. 
 
6.  (U) The National Assembly considered the Bohinc 
interpellation on 30 March in another day-long debate.  The 
primary set of complaints against Bohinc revolved around his 
management of various aspects of the \"erased\" issue.  He also 
was accused of procedural errors in the purchase of a police 
boat, chaotic management of a variety of public 
administration issues (salaries, pensions), and misuse of the 
Ministry\'s publication, \"Slovene Administration.\"  Bohinc 
refuted all accusations and emphasized that his actions on 
the \"erased,\" however controversial, were in accordance with 
the Constitution and the law. 
 
7.  (U) Again, the final vote on the motion basically 
followed party lines, with 30 deputies supporting Bohinc\'s 
removal and 46 opposing it.  Of interest, one LDS 
parliamentarian broke party ranks to vote in favor of the 
 
 
interpellation.  Additionally, five SLS deputies abstained 
from voting, despite the party\'s clear public stance 
supporting the interpellation.  The five announced their 
decision to abstain in a public letter to SLS President Janez 
Podobnik, in which they argued that supporting the 
interpellation would mean violation of the coalition 
agreement and that the party should first leave the coalition 
before supporting the interpellation. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
8. (SBU) Both interpellations were doomed from the start.  To 
be successful, an interpellation motion must receive 46 votes 
in favor.  LDS (Keber) and ZLSD (Bohinc) together have 45 
seats in the National Assembly without the support of the 
other two coalition parties and the two ethnic minority 
representatives who historically vote with the coalition. 
Thus, the two opposition initiatives were intended to serve 
mainly as a podium from which to criticize GoS actions on 
high profile issues causing public discontent -- health care 
reform and the erased. 
 
9.  (SBU) An additional, and somewhat unexpected, benefit 
that SDS and NSi got from the interpellation is the split it 
caused within SLS, with whom they usually compete for votes. 
In this regard both parties might see a slight increase in 
their popularity in the April public opinion polls, at SLS 
expense. 
 
10.  (SBU) SLS seems likely to suffer the most from the 
entire escapade.  While the party could have gained some 
voter support by publicly standing up to LDS and ZLSD on an 
issue of principle, the abstentions now make it look both 
disloyal and weak-kneed.  At the same time, the party\'s last- 
minute reversal is unlikely to save it from internal 
coalition reprisals.  The betrayal has already occurred and 
the political circles will no doubt suffer the consequences. 
Although SLS won\'t be kicked out of the coalition, its policy 
influence will be significantly reduced and it will be kept 
out of the loop on any sensitive political strategy issues -- 
exactly the consequences it likely would have suffered if it 
had supported the interpellations.  END COMMENT. 
 
YOUNG 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"15563","4/1/2004 5:38","04LJUBLJANA266","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04LJUBLJANA259","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 000266 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EUR, EUR/PPD, EUR/NCE, EUR/RPM, EUR/SCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, MARR, PGOV, KMDR, SI, NATO 
SUBJECT:  SLOVENIA: \"FORMER SOVIET BLOC\" RHETORIC ILL- 
RECEIVED (AND FOR GOOD REASON) 
 
REF: LJUBLJANA 0259 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  The Slovenian media have reported 
extensively on erroneous references to Slovenia as part of 
the \"former Soviet Bloc\" made during recent NATO accession 
ceremonies.  Slovenes take umbrage at this historical 
inaccuracy and the lack of understanding it demonstrates as 
to how former Non-Aligned and Warsaw Pact countries differ 
in their perspectives, priorities, and philosophies. 
Lumping of Slovenia together with the other six new NATO 
Allies under a single \"post-Soviet\" rubric has unfortunately 
added a bitter twist to many otherwise positive media 
commentaries on NATO accession.  Allies must learn from this 
experience, in order to better manage Slovenian public 
opinion and policy makers, but also in order to better 
prepare for the next group of potential invitees.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (U) On March 30, Slovenia\'s commercial POP TV carried a 
story during its main evening -news broadcast on Slovenia\'s 
accession to NATO that contained a brisk commentary by U.S. 
correspondent Natasa Briski on American misunderstandingof 
Slovenian history.  Briski noted that \"the U.. media have 
continuously reported that [the curent round of NATO 
accession] concerned only the cuntries of the former Soviet 
Bloc.\"  She also reorted that \"Based on what Bush said, we 
can alsoconclude that on this historic occasion the 
Presdent\'s speechwriters didn\'t bother to trouble 
thmselves with Slovenia\'s history.\"  The report came n the 
heels of POP TV\'s previous day\'s coverage aking the same 
point. 
 
3.  (U) Slovenia\'s leadng print daily \"Delo\" also carried a 
report on Mrch 31 by its U.S.-based correspondent Ervin 
Hlanik-Milharcic quoting President Bush\'s statement tht 
\"When NATO was founded, the people of these seen nations 
were captives to an empire.\"  Milharcc then sarcastically 
commented on the President\' statement by claiming that \"In 
these few sentenes before the White House, Bush was able to 
discoer a historical common denominator.\"  Left-of-center 
\"Vecer\" also points out in a March 31 report about the White 
House ceremonies that \"in President Bush\'s words these 
nations were captives of an empire.\" 
 
4.  (SBU) COMMENT:  Although the Slovenian media will 
generally find fault with U.S. policymakers whenever 
possible, we certainly are not doing ourselves any favors by 
portraying Slovenia as a former member of the Soviet Bloc. 
Such historical inaccuracies grate particularly harshly on 
Slovenian ears and exacerbate sensitivities that stem from 
the country\'s size and relative obscurity on the world 
stage.  Slovenes take pride in the fact that Yugoslavia was 
never a member of the Warsaw Pact and that it jealously 
guarded its independence from Moscow.  Historically 
conditioned fears of imperial subordination make it 
appropriate that this distinction (always) be acknowledged. 
5.  (SBU) COMMENT Cont:  It is also important for policy- 
makers in Washington and other Allied capitals to appreciate 
the implications of the proudly non-aligned mindset that 
Slovenia brings to the NATO table.  Average Slovenes value 
rather than repudiate their Cold War orientation, feeling a 
certain sense of superiority for having been \"above\" taking 
sides.  They carry little emotional baggage about relations 
with Russia and are likely to make reasoned, practical 
decisions about whether/how to work with Russia in the NATO 
context.  They feel less of a sense of historical obligation 
to the original NATO members, other than that generated by 
NATO\'s role in ending conflicts in the region.  They also 
still retain neutrality-based instincts about eschewing 
military conflict, and the old view of NATO and the Warsaw 
Pact as two sides of the same coin.  This means that the 
Slovenian population (and some policy-makers) will approach 
policy issues differently and will likely have a different 
set of knee-jerk reactions than other new Allies will.  It 
also means that Slovenia may be able to offer NATO 
insightful advice about managing enlargement in other former 
Yugoslav countries.  END COMMENT. 
 
 
YOUNG 
 
 
NNNN 
 

 2004LJUBLJ00266 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED 


 
v1.6.2 
"
"15753","4/6/2004 12:51","04LJUBLJANA283","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS LJUBLJANA 000283 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EUR, EUR/NCE, EUR/RPM, EUR/ERA, DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINR, SI, EUN 
SUBJECT: SLS TO PULL MINISTERS AND LEAVE COALITION 
 
 
    REF: A. LJUBLJANA 0279 
     B. LJUBLJANA 0265 
 
1.  (U) IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING AN 05 APRIL MEETING OF THE 
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE PEOPLES PARTY (SLS), SLS PRESIDENT 
JANEZ PODOBNIK ANNOUNCED THAT THE THREE SLS MINISTERS 
(JUSTICE MINISTER IVAN BIZJAK, TRANSPORT MINISTER JAKOB 
PRESECNIK, AND AGRICULTURE MINISTER FRANC BUT) WOULD BE 
OFFERING THEIR RESIGNATIONS IN THE COMING DAYS.  THE MOVE IS 
IN RESPONSE TO PM ROP\'S DECISION (REF A) TO EXCLUDE SLS FROM 
ALL GOVERNING COALITION DECISION-MAKING FOLLOWING SLS\'S 
FAILURE TO SUPPORT MINISTERS KEBER AND BOHINC DURING RECENT 
NO CONFIDENCE VOTES (REF B).  A FORMAL SLS WITHDRAWAL FROM 
GOVERNMENT DOES NOT ENDANGER THE COALITION\'S PARLIAMENTARY 
DOMINANCE.  TOGETHER, THE REMAINING THREE GOS PARTIES -- LDS, 
ZLSD, AND DESUS STILL HOLD 49 OF THE 90 NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 
SEATS AND RETAIN THE GENERAL SUPPORT OF THE TWO ETHNIC 
MINORITY REPRESENTATIVES. 
 
2.  (SBU) COMMENT:  THIS DEVELOPMENT IS REALLY AN SLS ATTEMPT 
TO SALVAGE AS MUCH VOTER RESPECT AS IT CAN POSSIBLY CLING TO, 
AFTER BADLY MISMANAGING THE PUBLIC RELATIONS ASPECTS OF ITS 
FAILURE TO SUPPORT BOHINC AND KEBER.  TO HAVE GAINED THE 
LARGEST SHARE OF VOTER CONFIDENCE, THE SLS SHOULD HAVE TAKEN 
A PRINCIPLED STANCE FROM THE START -- MAKING A BIG SHOW OF 
PULLING OUT OF THE COALITION AND EAGERLY VOTING FOR THE 
INTERPELLATIONS AGAINST BOHINC AND KEBER.  INSTEAD, THEY 
APPEARED INDECISIVE AND WISHY-WASHY BECAUSE THEY ABSTAINED 
RATHER THAN FOLLOWING THROUGH ON THREATS TO VOTE AGAINST 
KEBER AND BOHINC AND THEN RESPONDED TO ROP\'S BANISHMENT BY 
ASSERTING THEIR INTENTION TO REMAIN IN GOVERNMENT (REF A). 
    LEAVING THE COALITION NOW MAY SAVE THEM FROM TOTAL 
IRRELEVANCE, BUT MAKES IT UNLIKELY THEY CAN STEAL VOTES FROM 
OTHER COALITION PARTIES.  SLS MAY STILL PICK UP SOME 
ELECTORAL SUPPORT AT THE EXPENSE OF OTHER OPPOSITION PARTIES, 
BUT BY CHICKENING OUT ON THE INTERPELLATIONS, THEY HAVE 
DIMINISHED THOSE CHANCES AS WELL.  END COMMENT. 
YOUNG 
 
NNNN 
"
"16024","4/15/2004 12:22","04LJUBLJANA324","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SECSTATE78071","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS LJUBLJANA 000324 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, SOCI, SI, OSCE 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: FOMIN TO ATTEND BERLIN ANTI-SEMITISM 
CONFERENCE 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 78071 
 
     B. SECSTATE 81476 

1.  (U) POL/ECON CHIEF AND POL-MILOFF DELIVERED REFTEL 
TALKING POINTS AND DELEGATION LIST ON 15 APRIL TO MFA OSCE 
TASK FORCE MEMBERS URSKA AJDISEK AND KATARINA GRADIC, BOTH OF 
WHOM WORK ON HUMAN DIMENSION ISSUES.  AJDISEK SAID THAT FOMIN 
DMITRIJ RUPEL AND AT LEAST TWO OF HIS KEY STAFFERS, INCLUDING 
HIS CHIEF OF STAFF SANJA STIGLIC, WOULD ATTEND THE 
CONFERENCE.  SHE ADDED THAT, WHILE NOT YET CONFIRMED, RUPEL 
PLANS TO DELIVER A SPEECH DURING THE FIRST SESSION OF THE 
CONFERENCE.  DR. HANNAH STARMAN, ONE OF SLOVENIA\'S FOREMOST 
EXPERTS ON ANTI-SEMITISM AND THE FORMER DIRECTOR OF THE 
INSTITUTE FOR HEBREW AND JEWISH STUDIES AT A PRIVATELY-FUNDED 
GRADUATE SCHOOL FOR THE HUMANITIES IN LJUBLJANA, WILL BE 
INCLUDED AS A PUBLIC MEMBER OF THE SLOVENIAN DELEGATION.  IN 
ADDITION TO RUPEL, HIS STAFF, AND STARMAN, THE SLOVENIAN 
DELEGATION WILL INCLUDE THE SLOVENIAN AMBASSADOR TO GERMANY, 
SIMONA DRENIK FROM THE SLOVENIAN MISSION TO THE OSCE, AND 
GRADIC. 
 
2.  (U) AJDISEK SAID THAT THE MFA HAD BEEN INFORMED THAT 
FOMINS FROM IRELAND, LUXEMBOURG, CZECH REPUBLIC AND GERMANY 
WOULD PARTICIPATE IN THE CONFERENCE.  WHILE NOT NECESSARILY 
FROM THE RESPECTIVE FOREIGN MINISTRIES, SHE SAID THAT 
MINISTER-LEVEL REPRESENTATION FROM SWEDEN, LATVIA, FINLAND 
AND THE UK IS FORESEEN, AND THAT DENMARK AND POLAND WILL SEND 
REPRESENTATIVES AT THE STATE SECRETARY LEVEL. 
 
3.  (SBU) COMMENT:  BY INCLUDING STARMAN, IT APPEARS THAT THE 
GOS IS FINALLY RESPONDING TO THE POSITIVE EXAMPLE SET BY THE 
U.S. OF INCLUDING NON-GOVERNMENTAL EXPERTS IN DELEGATIONS TO 
SUCH CONFERENCES.  THIS IS THE FIRST TIME THAT WE ARE AWARE 
    OF A WILLINGNESS BY THE GOS TO REACH BEYOND THE CONFINES OF 
THEIR MINISTRIES TO PUT TOGETHER THE MOST EFFECTIVE 
DELEGATION POSSIBLE.  WE HOPE IT MARKS THE BEGINNING OF A 
TREND THAT WILL CONTINUE AS THEY INTENSIFY OSCE-RELATED 
ACTIVITIES IN PREPARATION FOR THEIR CHAIRMANSHIP-IN-OFFICE IN 
2005 AND BEYOND.  END COMMENT 
YOUNG 
 
NNNN 
"
"16055","4/16/2004 9:50","04LJUBLJANA333","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 000333 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, ECON, SI 
SUBJECT:  RUPEL WALKING ON THIN ICE 
 
REF: (A) LJUBLJANA 0292 AND PREVIOUS, (B) LJUBLJANA 
 
0212 AND PREVIOUS 
 
1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  FM Rupel sent a public letter to 
National Assembly members on 13 April openly opposing 
the nomination of State Prosecutor General Zdenka Cerar 
to replace Ivan Bizjak as Justice Minister.  The letter 
also pointedly criticizes the governing coalition for 
abusing its strong parliamentary position at the 
expense of political consensus on issues of national 
interest.  Media spin in English-language press outlets 
focused on Cerar\'s statements implying that the letter 
was nothing more than Rupel taking revenge on her for 
the diplomatic academy case (ref B).  Slovenian- 
language commentary appears more broadly focused on 
trashing Rupel\'s reputation and record via a less-than- 
strict adherence to the facts.  Rupel issued a 
clarifying statement on 15 April that unconvincingly 
attempts to cast the controversy as a misinterpretation 
of his original intent, explaining that he faulted 
Cerar\'s manner of fighting for the ministerial slot 
rather than Rop\'s nomination of her. We don\'t know what 
Rupel\'s intent was, but he has stepped out on a limb in 
openly challenging PM Rop, the LDS political 
strategists, and the coalition leadership.  Rop has 
deferred announcing any official punishment of Rupel 
until his five new Cabinet ministers are in place (ref 
A), but Rupel\'s future is far from certain.  This and 
other incidents further exacerbate unity problems 
within both the coalition and the LDS.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (U) On April 7, 2004, the three Peoples Party (SLS) 
ministers resigned from their GoS positions following 
the party\'s exclusion from all coalition decision- 
making after SLS failed to support two coalition 
ministers facing no-confidence votes (ref A).  On April 
9, 2004 PM Rop proposed technocrat replacements for the 
three ministers to the Parliament, with coalition 
agreement:  State Prosecutor General Zdenka Cerar for 
Justice Minister, Marko Pavliha for Agriculture 
Minister, and Milan Pogacnik for Transport Minister. 
Opposition parties have only objected to Cerar\'s 
nomination, based on concerns over her performance as 
State Prosecutor. 
 
3.  (U) On 13 April, Foreign Minister Dimitrij Rupel 
sent a personal letter to National Assembly members in 
which he openly opposed Rop\'s proposal of Cerar for the 
Minister of Justice.  In his letter Rupel claimed Cerar 
is not an appropriate candidate for the position, given 
that she \"frequently proceeded in contradiction with 
the proverbial independence of judiciary\" in the 
execution of her current duties and that nominating her 
for minister would be contrary to the \"realization\" of 
European standards and would cause Slovenia to become 
an object of derision.  He also accused Cerar of \"being 
responsible for delays in solving some of the most 
sensitive cases, such as SIB Bank, in which even some 
prominent LDS members are involved.\" 
 
4.  (U) Rupel\'s letter went on to pointedly criticize 
the governing style of the coalition itself, and by 
implication, PM Rop and his own Liberal Democratic 
Party (LDS).  Rupel wrote:  \"regrettably recently, even 
in cases of national interest, we often decide for 
polarization and elimination instead of gathering 
around the center and looking for consensus.  They [LDS 
and the rest of coalition] disregard the importance of 
understanding and think that simple outvoting and 
deciding with the majority is enough for controlling 
complex social processes.  Even the decisions that 
brought to the separation of SLS and the coalition 
prove that we are in the middle of explicit 
polarization.\" 
 
5.  (U) On 14 April, Cerar reacted to the letter by 
expressing the hope that she would have the opportunity 
to answer Rupel\'s charges during her parliamentary 
hearings.  Suggesting that Rupel\'s comments were 
revenge-based, she also stated, \"I regret that this 
personal and political overreaction happened at my 
candidacy in the manner of an irresponsible attempt to 
harm my personal reputation and the reputation of the 
prosecution office and overall judiciary.\"  She added 
that \"...during my leadership, Slovenian State 
Prosecutors never performed under my dictate, nor under 
a political one, but only by the law, and independently 
 
within the framework of their authority.\" [NOTE: On 15 
April, the National Assembly\'s International Affairs 
Committee approved Cerar\'s nomination by a vote of 12- 
5, split along party lines.  Full floor vote is 
scheduled for 19 April.] 
 
6.  (U) Other reaction from GoS officials has been 
reserved.  LDS Education Minister Slavko Gaber (who 
usually finds himself on the opposite side of policy 
and political strategy battles with Rupel) quipped 
\"well, you know he likes to write...\" when asked to 
comment by TV Slovenia.  PM Rop initially said only 
that \"it would be wrong to react too emotionally and 
quickly\" to the letter, but that \"Cerar will easily 
respond to Rupel\'s criticisms.\"  Later on 15 April, 
after consulting with the LDS executive council, Rop 
announced that he would hold off making any decisions 
on Rupel\'s continued participation in the government 
until after the replacements for Ministers Potocnik, 
Petrin, Bizjak, But, and Presecnik were in place. 
Asked about the executive council views on Rupel\'s 
future, Rop responded \"There are different positions. 
I think that foremost the interests of the state and 
the tasks ahead should be pursued, and of course in 
this context it should be studied how and in what way 
the functioning of the government can be provided 
efficiently.\"  Rop deferred questions about Rupel\'s 
continued willingness to serve in the government to 
Rupel himself, but did comment that \"it will have to be 
seen whether this is possible.\" 
 
7.  (SBU) Several prominent newspaper commentators have 
lashed into Rupel already, no doubt (again) smelling 
blood in the water.  Criticisms go well beyond Rupel\'s 
current act of rebellion, dragging out every 
\"indiscretion\" -- both real and imagined -- he has 
committed during his tenure.  The attacks are not by 
any stretch of the imagination confined to the facts. 
For example, Rupel has been accused of signing the 
infamous V-10 Statement on Iraq in blatant disregard of 
the Cabinet position, when in fact he was authorized to 
do so.  He also has been accused of paying millions of 
tolars under the table to the nascent diplomatic 
academy in return for a teaching job, when the MFA 
budget and the official Letter of Agreement he signed 
with the academy clearly prove otherwise. 
 
8.  (SBU) Rupel himself reentered the fray late on 15 
April, issuing a public statement clarifying his 
original letter.  In it he presented a less than 
convincing argument that his intent had been 
misinterpreted.  Rupel explained that he did not mean 
to criticize PM Rop for nominating Cerar or the 
coalition for supporting that nomination.  Rather, he 
faulted the manner in which Cerar herself had pursued 
the ministerial slot, since he personally believed it 
was unsuitable for a candidate to actively fight for 
such a prominent position, but instead should await the 
PM\'s decision and accept it graciously. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
9.  (SBU) We don\'t know to what degree the media\'s 
bashing of Rupel is being directed by his political 
rivals.  Rupel has a generally adversarial relationship 
with the press, so it would not take much prompting to 
get the ink flowing.  However, Delo\'s lead editorial on 
the topic was viciously comprehensive in its itemizing 
of Rupel\'s sins.  The prominent placement of the piece 
in the paper\'s morning edition is particularly 
noteworthy given that the story of the letter first 
broke in television newscasts the prior evening -- 
after normal filing deadlines.  Additionally, a more 
general editorial by a longtime intellectual adversary 
of Rupel\'s, which featured a similar laundry list of 
criticisms, appeared in the morning paper on the day 
that Rupel sent the letter. 
 
10.  (SBU) We also don\'t know Rupel\'s motivation in 
sending the letter, the implications of which he must 
have realized.  Rupel certainly has no love lost for 
Cerar.  He has disagreed with the direction in which 
domestic political players like Gaber have taken LDS 
recently.  He has a generally good relationship with 
former LDS leader President Drnovsek -- who understands 
the importance of consensus to Slovenian political 
 
tradition and has had a falling out with former protg 
Rop.  Rupel also has a good personal relationship with 
SDS President Janez Jansa -- his old DEMOS colleague. 
In any case, he has taken his professional future in 
his hands with this move, and his survival is far from 
certain. 
 
 
11.  (SBU) The Rupel letter is the latest in a series 
of recent developments that reflect a growing crisis of 
unity among governing coalition parties and within the 
ranks of the LDS.  The constant disputes with SLS when 
it was still a member of the coalition, the SLS 
rebellion and expulsion, the inability of the coalition 
to gain parliamentary approval for candidates for 
routine positions (such as the Head of the Court of 
Audit, the Slovenian Eurojust rep, and a variety of EU 
judicial positions), and now Rupel\'s letter are the 
most obvious indications of these internal problems. 
However, we have also heard complaints from LDS party 
contacts and from staff within the Prime Minister\'s 
Office about Rop\'s general inaccessibility -- routinely 
blamed on the tight control maintained by his personal 
communications adviser and closest aide, Marijana 
Kanduti. 
 
12.  (SBU) Internal rivalries are not new to LDS. 
There have been problems and the emergence of factions 
in the past.  But, the party has always managed to 
overcome disputes and to organize itself at the right 
moment, before elections, (helped by the fact that the 
internal factions have no desire to weaken the 
political powerhouse they are fighting over, and by the 
opposition\'s historical inability to present voters a 
viable alternative).  However, a crucial electoral 
dynamic is that Slovenian voters (not unlike their 
American counterparts) tend to vote against 
parties/candidates rather than in favor of them. 
Taking this into consideration, LDS will place itself 
in a risky position if it does not settle things 
quickly, as voters could be sufficiently frustrated to 
vote against LDS.  Whether those votes would go to a 
different coalition party (ZLSD, for example) or to the 
opposition is not clear.  However Janez Jansa\'s SDS is 
positioning itself to take advantage of this 
possibility by announcing the formation of a shadow 
cabinet.  END COMMENT. 
 
 
YOUNG 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"16146","4/20/2004 13:16","04LJUBLJANA349","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04LJUBLJANA292|04LJUBLJANA333","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 000349 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE, EUR/SCE, EUR/ERA, EB 
USDOC FOR 4232/MAC/EUR/EERIS/CEEBIC/BURGESS/ROGERS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EAGR, PGOV, PINR, SI 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: CABINET RESHUFFLE LEADS TO NEW 
MINISTERS OF ECONOMY, EUROPEAN AFFAIRS, JUSTICE, 
AGRICULTURE, AND TRANSPORTATION 
 
REF:  A) LJUBLJANA 292 
      B) LJUBLJANA 333 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  On 20 April, five new ministers 
were sworn in as \"caretakers\" for the remainder of the 
year.  The new ministers include three professors: 
Matek Lahovnik, Minister of Economy, Marko Pavliha, 
Minister of Transport, and Milan Pogancnik, Minister of 
Agriculture, and two technocrats, Milan Cvikl, a bank 
executive and Zdenka Cerar, General State Prosecutor, 
as Minister for European Affairs and Justice, 
respectively. [NOTE:  Biographic information provided 
starting on paragraph 5.  END NOTE].  We do not 
anticipate any substantive policy changes as the major 
political parties prepare for parliamentary elections 
to take place in the fall.  The government will focus 
its efforts on a smooth transition into the EU. 
However, intra-party quarrels such as FoMin Rupel\'s 
criticism of Cerar to lead the Justice Ministry preview 
an electoral campaign where party leadership will be 
challenged -- ushering in a new cadre of leaders.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) It was not until the early hours of 20 April, 
that the National Assembly approved the five 
nominations (presented as a package) with 51 
parliamentarians voting in favor, and 25 against. The 
approval was never in question, as the ruling coalition 
had secured enough votes.  The anticipated cabinet 
changes to replace departing Ministers for European 
Affairs, Janez Potocnik (Slovenia\'s EU Commissioner 
designate) and of the Economy, Tea Petrin (slated to 
become Slovenia\'s Ambassador to the Netherlands) turned 
into a full cabinet reshuffle as Slovenian People\'s 
Party (SLS) ministers stepped down after the ruling 
coalition decided to expel it from the decision making 
process.  The power play was prompted by SLS support, 
albeit tepid, of the opposition\'s attempt to remove 
both the Ministers of Health and Interior (ref A). 
 
3. (U) The reshuffling, however, took an interesting 
turn when FoMin Rupel sent a letter to Parliament 
criticizing the Government\'s decision to appoint Zdenka 
Cerar as Minister of Justice.  In the letter, Rupel 
claimed that Cerar\'s appointment was a defeat to 
\"European principles of justice.\"  [NOTE: Some in the 
media speculate that Cerar\'s decision to investigate 
and to press charges against Rupel over the opening of 
a Diplomatic Academy prompted the FoMin\'s comments (ref 
B), where other sources observe that he is positioning 
himself as someone who could also work under a new 
opposition-led government, particularly now as some 
polls indicate the Social Democrat Party (SDS) leading 
the ruling LDS Party. END NOTE].  With the exception of 
Mr. Lahovnik, whose credentials have been challenged by 
some business executives and criticized by the media 
over comments he made during the nomination process, 
the other nominees have received positive assessments. 
The new ministers assumed their duties immediately. 
Senior ministry officials (State Secretaries) will 
submit their resignations, though no major changes are 
anticipated. 
 
4.  (SBU) COMMENT:  With elections coming in less than 
six months, the new ministers will be asked to \"hold 
down the fort\" until a new government is convened later 
this year.  The current interplay among the various 
party factions will determine the type of government, 
and the possible alliances that will be required to 
establish a coalition strong enough to survive.  The 
inner LDS struggles -- highlighted by Rupel\'s comments 
against Cerar\'s appointment -- have sent a strong 
signal that the elections are wide-open this year.  The 
intra-party squabbles are not limited to LDS, however. 
The opposition parties are also trying to define their 
own platforms, thus confounding their own aspirations. 
END COMMENT. 
 
5.  (SBU) START BIOGRAPHIC NOTES ON NEW MINISTERS: 
 
MILAN M. CVIKL, Minister of European Affairs 
 
Milan Cvikl was born on 20 March 1959, in the 
 
coalmining town of Velenje (north-central Slovenia). 
He received a Bachelors degree in Economics from the 
University of Ljubjana in 1983.  Six years later he 
earned a Master\'s degree in Economic Analysis and 
Planning.  He studied in Canada and the U.S. for a few 
months in 1983.  Cvikl was the recipient of a 
government sponsored academic scholarship for \"talented 
students.\"  [NOTE: Active work in the Socialist Youth 
Organization was a precondition to receive this 
scholarship]. 
 
Cvikl joined the Bank of Slovenia immediately after 
completing his Bachelors degree.  Known for his hard 
work and assertiveness, he soon became deputy director 
of the Central Bank\'s Analysis and Research Center.  In 
1990, he joined a group of experts drafting monetary 
legislation as Slovenia was seeking independence. 
 
In 1990, Slovenia\'s first Prime Minister Lojze Peterle 
offered him the Finance portfolio.  He rejected the 
offer because he did not feel the position was 
\"politically safe.\"  In the 1990\'s, Cvikl worked for 
Slovenia\'s largest commercial bank, Nova Ljubljanska 
Banka (NLB), the World Bank, and the Ministry of 
Finance.  At the World Bank, Cvikl worked on several 
World Bank projects related to central and southeastern 
Europe.  Starting in 1998 through 2000, Cvikl served as 
a State Secretary for Budget and Public Finance at the 
Ministry of Finance.  He was one of principal drafters 
of the public procurement legislation. 
 
Cvikl returned to NLB in 2000 as Assistant Executive 
Director, heading the Financial Management and Support 
Department.  In 2001, he became NLB\'s Chief Financial 
Officer, but failed to join the board of directors in 
2002 when Belgium\'s KBC Group acquired 34% of NLB. 
Cvikl has often lectured at the Center of Excellence in 
Finance (CFC) in Ljubljana. 
 
Cvikl is fluent in English and Serbo-Croatian, and has 
a passive knowledge of German.  He is married and has 
two children. 
 
 
MATEJ LAHOVNIK, Minister of Economy 
 
Lahovnik is 32 years old.  He received a Bachelors 
degree in Economics from the University of Ljubljana in 
1994.  In 1998 he received his Master\'s degree in 
Business Finance.  Lahovnik completed his PhD in 
Business Administration, Management and Organization at 
the University of Ljubljana in 2000. 
 
Lahovnik has been employed at the Faculty of Economics 
of Ljubljana University since 1993.  He has been a 
visiting researcher at Indiana University\'s Kelley 
Business School, specializing in strategic management. 
Lahovnik currently chairs the Business Administration, 
Management and Organization Department at the Faculty 
of Economics. 
 
Lahovnik is young and has no prior business experience. 
Although Slovenian business executives have declined to 
make official comments about his nomination, some have 
informally expressed concerns over his ability (or lack 
thereof) to deal effectively with the country\'s 
economic realties.  Lahovnik wrote a study on 
management buy-out for BTC, a leading real estate 
company.  Over the past twelve months, BTC has been the 
focus of intense media scrutiny over its business 
ethics conduct.  Addressing his detractors, Lahovnik 
explained that he worked on only one phase of the 
business operation. 
 
Lahovnik was a minor owner of defunct and bankrupt SIB 
Bank.  He sold his bank\'s shares in 2001, two years 
prior to the outbreak of the SIB financial scandal.  He 
has been a frequent speaker at business events and 
contributor to the leading financial newspaper, 
Finance.  In his articles, he has supported the listing 
of state companies like Telekom Slovenia at the Stock 
Exchange; establishing the second financial pillar; 
developing comprehensive tax reform shifting the burden 
away from the middle class; and reducing labor costs. 
 
Lahovnik has indicated that as Minister, he would like 
 
to focus his efforts on two issues:  increasing FDI 
inflows, and enhancing companies\' competitiveness 
abroad. 
 
Lahovnik is not married.  He is fluent in English and 
German. 
 
 
MARKO PAVLIHA, Minister of Transport 
 
Pavliha was born on 15 December 1962 in Ljubljana.  He 
received his Bachelors degree in Law in 1986 from the 
University of Ljubljana.  He obtained his Master\'s 
degree from University of Split, Croatia, and McGill 
University in Canada.  He completed his PhD on Implied 
Terms of Voyage Charters in 1991 at McGill University. 
He passed the Slovenian Bar Examination in 1993. 
 
Pavliha was a research assistant at McGill University 
from 1989 through 1992.  In 1993 he became an Assistant 
Professor of Transport and Insurance Law at the 
University of Ljubljana. In 1999 he was promoted to 
Associate Professor.  Since 1999, he has spent time as 
a visiting professor at the University of Split, 
Australia\'s Queensland University, Belgium\'s Catholic 
University, and at the International Maritime Institute 
in Malta.  In 2004, Pavliha was promoted to Senior 
Professor of Commercial, Transport and Insurance Law at 
the University of Ljubljana. 
 
In 2003, Pavliha was elected one of Ten Most 
Influential Slovenian Lawyers, for the second time.  He 
has received several awards at home and abroad.  He was 
actively involved in preparing significant Slovenian 
legislation dealing with infrastructure, natural 
disasters, civil aviation, nuclear damage, insurance, 
and maritime issues. 
 
Pavliha is married and has two children.  He is a 
permanent English and French court interpreter.  He is 
also fluent in Croatian and German, and has passive 
knowledge of Italian. 
 
 
MILAN POGACNIK, Minister of Agriculture 
 
Milan Pogacnik was born in 1946.  He received a 
Bachelors degree from the University of Ljubljana in 
1971.  He obtained his PhD in Pathologic Morphology at 
the University of Ljubljana. 
 
Pogacnik started his professional career at the Faculty 
of Veterinary at the University of Ljubljana as 
Assistant Professor.  He was promoted to university 
professor in 1985.  In 1989, he became a head of 
Institute of Pathology and Forensic Veterinary.  In 
1990 he became a Dean of Faculty of Veterinary at the 
University of Ljubljana. 
 
Pogacnik is a respected scientist, researcher and 
policy worker in the field of veterinary and 
agriculture in general.  His contribution in preparing 
Slovenian legislation on veterinary and cattle breeding 
before and after country\'s independence has been 
significant. 
 
After accession to the EU, he anticipates that the most 
protected agricultural sectors, such as diary 
producers, will face serious challenges.  He is aware 
of his limitations, \"I cannot solve all problems in the 
remaining six months,\" but indicated that he will work 
diligently to identify existing and potential 
bottlenecks affecting Slovenian agriculture. 
 
Pogacnik received the National Order of Highest Rank in 
2000. 
 
He is married and has two children.  He is fluent in 
German and English. 
 
 
ZDENKA CERAR, Minister of Justice 
 
Cerar was born on 17 September 1941 in Ljubljana, where 
she completed her school studies.  After graduating 
from the Faculty of Law, she worked as a law clerk for 
 
Ljubljana District Court. She passed the state bar 
examination in February 1969. 
 
In October 1969 she was appointed deputy municipal 
public prosecutor in Ljubljana and has worked as a 
prosecutor since that time.  From 01 March 1969 to 30 
September 1969, she was employed in the legal affairs 
section of the Republic Secretariat for Finance, 
handling appeals. 
 
In 1974, she was appointed deputy district public 
prosecutor in Ljubljana.  Following the reorganization 
of the judiciary, she was appointed deputy public 
prosecutor in Ljubljana and head of the General Crime 
Division in January 1979.  She held this position until 
January 1981, when she was appointed deputy High 
Prosecutor.  After a second reorganization, she was 
appointed as High State Prosecutor (January 1995 to 
September 1995). Following a successful candidature 
under the new State Prosecutor Act, she became Supreme 
State Prosecutor on 20 September 1995. 
 
In 1999, the National Assembly appointed Cerar General 
State Prosecutor.  During her five-year period as a 
deputy municipal public prosecutor in Ljubljana, she 
was also head of the juvenile division and was actively 
involved in this field in other institutions. 
 
She is married and has three children.  She was a 
member of the national gymnastics team, and a coach and 
referee after she ended her career.  She was also one 
of the co-founders of the Lawyer sports club in which 
she has been active as an official and sportswoman for 
over 20 years. 
 
Cerar received the National Silver Star Order of Merit 
in 1984. 
 
END BIOGRAPHIC NOTES 
 
YOUNG 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"16348","4/26/2004 12:43","04LJUBLJANA377","Embassy Ljubljana","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE89155","O 261243Z APR 04
FM AMEMBASSY LJUBLJANA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2364
INFO EU MEMBER STATES IMMEDIATE
AMEMBASSY AMMAN IMMEDIATE 
AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS IMMEDIATE 
AMEMBASSY KUWAIT IMMEDIATE 
AMEMBASSY RIYADH IMMEDIATE 
AMCONSUL ISTANBUL IMMEDIATE 
","C O N F I D E N T I A L LJUBLJANA 000377 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/SCE, EUR/ERA, EUR/RPM, EUR/NCE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/25/2014 
TAGS: PINS, PREL, PTER, IZ, TU, SY, JO, SI 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: TERRORISM FINANCE: PREVENTING KONGRA-GEL 
TRAVEL 
 
REF: STATE 89155 

CLASSIFIED BY: DEPUTY CHIEF OF MISSION DEAN J. HAAS FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) 
AND (D) 
 
 1. (C) ON 23 APRIL, ECONOFF DELIVERED REFTEL POINTS TO PETER 
JAPELJ, FIRST COUNSELOR IN THE MFA OFFICE OF INTERNATIONAL 
SECURITY AND DISARMAMENT.  JAPELJ PROMISED TO SHARE THE 
INFORMATION WITH MFA STATE UNDERSECRETARY FOR VISA POLICY 
ANDREJ STER.  HE WILL ALSO DISSEMINATE THE INFORMATION AMONG 
THE PERTINENT GOVERNMENT OFFICES IN HIS DEPARTMENT\'S CAPACITY 
AS SECRETARY OF THE INTERDEPARTMENTAL WORKING GROUP CHARGED 
WITH MONITORING AND ENFORCING TERRORISM LEGISLATION. 
 
 
YOUNG 
"
"16432","4/28/2004 13:30","04LJUBLJANA381","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04LJUBLJANA292","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 000381 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
USDOC FOR 4232/MAC/EUR/EERIS/CEEBIC/BURGESS/ROGERS 
USDOC FOR MAC/ADVOCACY/NUGENT 
VIENNA FOR COMMERCIAL COUNSELOR 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:    N/A 
TAGS: BEXP, ELAB, ETRD, PHUM, SENV, AMGT, SI 
SUBJECT:  SLOVENIA: COM PRESSES HEALTHMIN FOR TRANSPARENCY 
IN ONCOLOGY INSTITUTE TENDER 
 
REF: A) LJUBLJANA 292 
 
     B) 03 LJUBLJANA 1103 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified.  Please protect accordingly. 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  In a 16 April meeting, Minister of 
Health, Dusan Keber, assured COM that a public tender 
competition to equip a Slovenian medical facility with high- 
tech scanning equipment will be fair and transparent.  Keber 
noted that Meditrade (General Electric\'s distributor in 
Slovenia and the only U.S. company expected to submit a bid) 
will have the same chance as any other bidder to win the 
estimated Euro 7 million tender.  He indicated that the 
Ministry of Health (MoH) will appoint a commission to assess 
bids and award the contract.  Local GE representatives have 
expressed concerns about the overall transparency of the 
process and noted traditional MoH bias in favor of Siemens 
or Philips.  COM also raised U.S. pharmaceutical companies\' 
concerns about the MoH drug insurance reimbursement program 
and the associated financial losses incurred by the U.S. 
companies as a result of the plan.  Keber reported that it 
was too soon to assess the new program\'s overall benefit, 
but that he remained confident of its long-term 
sustainability.  Finally, Keber pledged to raise concerns 
about the provision of statistics on trafficking in persons 
with his fellow cabinet members, promising immediate 
assistance from his staff, if necessary.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (U) On 16 April, COM, accompanied by Pol-Miloff and FSN 
Commercial Specialist called on HealthMin Dusan Keber to 
advocate on behalf of Meditrade-GE in its bid for a Euro 7 
million tender to equip either the new Oncology Institute or 
another state-run medical facility with new equipment.  The 
tender is due to open in either May or June.  COM also 
discussed the record of the recently adopted health reform 
package.  Simon Vrhunc, MoH State Secretary for Health 
System Organization, also participated in the meeting. 
 
Equipping the new Oncology Institute 
------------------------------------ 
 
3.  (U) The approximately Euro 7 million tender will be, by 
far, the most valuable offer in the Slovenian healthcare 
system for the next couple of years.  The tender is expected 
to include the following equipment: PET/CT scanner; magnetic 
resonance; computer tomography; 2 gamma cameras; digital 
mamography x-ray system; 3 ultrasounds; 3 classical x-ray 
units; and 45 monitors for patient care.  According to 
Meditrade-GE, winning the tender is essential to establish 
market presence and position for future sales.  [NOTE:  GE\'s 
20 percent market-share in Slovenia is well below its 30-35 
percent European average.  END NOTE]. 
 
4. (SBU) COM informed Keber of Meditrade-GE\'s interest in 
submitting a bid to supply the new Oncology Institute\'s 
medical equipment.  He highlighted GE\'s international 
reputation as an industry leader -- known for its superior 
quality at reasonable costs.  COM stressed the importance of 
having an open, fair, and transparent tender process -- one 
where impropriety charges would not stand a chance. 
 
5. (SBU) Keber informed COM that a tender would be announced 
after hospital directors and public officials sort out what 
type of equipment is needed and to which institute it will 
go.  [NOTE:  The new Oncology Institute is battling the more 
established Radiology Institute for the equipment.  END 
NOTE].  The Minister told COM that parliament had queried 
him regarding this tender during its interpellation 
proceedings examining his record, satisfying him that there 
may be outside pressure mounting already to influence the 
bidding process.  [NOTE: The National Assembly conducted 
interpellation proceedings (vote of confidence) against the 
Ministers of Health and of Interior, which they both 
survived (Ref A). END NOTE]. Nonetheless, the MoH will 
appoint a Commission to review all of the bids in accordance 
with public procurement regulations, and Keber assured COM 
that the tender would \"fair\" and \"transparent.\" 
 
6.  (SBU) Keber explained that the Commission will have to 
consider various factors relating to the tender in order to 
keep it in line with the overarching MoH cost-containment 
policy.  Whereas the equipment under consideration could 
carry-out up to 5,000 examinations per year, the demand thus 
far has been limited.  Only 20 patients in Slovenia required 
such exams in Slovenia in 2003, according to Keber, and they 
were sent to Austria.  As such, Keber said that the 
Commission will have to conduct a cost benefit analysis to 
 
 
determine whether the equipment under consideration is even 
desirable in light of the low demand and impetus to reduce 
costs.  COM noted that the purchase of the new equipment 
could help establish Slovenia as a regional center for these 
types of examinations while defraying some of the costs. 
Keber underscored his earlier point about the transparency 
of tenders run by the MoH and expressed confidence that the 
\"best producer will win,\" noting that GE\'s Meditrade \"can 
win without your support.\" 
 
Health Care Reforms; U.S. Pharmaceutical Companies 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
7.  (SBU) When COM asked about the benefits brought by the 
recent healthcare reforms, Keber indicated that five months 
was not sufficient time to assess the program\'s overall 
benefits.  He said preliminary estimates show savings in the 
realm of US $10 million (approximately 4 percent of total 
annual drug costs of the state-run Health Insurance Fund). 
COM noted that U.S. pharmaceutical companies representatives 
have voiced concern over the drug reimbursement plan, and 
its impact on their ability to introduce new drugs to the 
market in Slovenia (ref B).  Keber told COM that while 
pharmaceutical companies, both innovative and generic, 
continue to voice concerns, new data protection laws, 
mandated by the EU and already in place in Slovenia, would 
ensure that profits will go back to the original producers 
of drugs. 
 
TIP Report 
---------- 
 
8. (SBU) COM alerted Keber to concerns about GoS abilities 
to provide information requested by the Embassy for the 
upcoming DoS Trafficking In Persons Report.  Keber promised 
to raise the issue with fellow cabinet members and pledged 
to provide any missing information for the MoH immediately. 
[NOTE:  The relevant GoS office was already alerted to the 
need for timely information and the missing information was 
provided even as COM and Keber were meeting.  END NOTE]. 
 
9.  (SBU) COMMENT: Having survived a parliamentary motion to 
replace him, Keber is well aware that a number of parties 
with various interests will be closely following and 
monitoring the Euro 7 million tender.  With Siemens 
equipment visible in most of the country\'s clinics and 
hospitals, the medical sector has been traditionally closed 
to U.S. companies thus far.  The MoH\'s tendering processes 
have been under the microscope recently, as the nation\'s 
largest hospital (Ljubljana\'s Klinicni Center) procured 
expensive and unreliable equipment in a questionable tender 
process in September 2003.  According to GE-Meditrade 
representatives, the tender process is much further along 
than Keber\'s comments would lead us to believe -- well 
beyond the \"bickering stage\" between the two institutes. 
Mission will continue to monitor the process and support the 
efforts of the sole U.S. company.  END COMMENT. 
 
YOUNG 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"16757","5/10/2004 12:23","04LJUBLJANA429","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03LJUBLJANA1166|04SECSTATE101244","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS LJUBLJANA 000429 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR T, P, EUR/NCE, NP, PM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MASS, MARR, PREL, SI 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: ARTICLE 98 FOLLOW-UP 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 101244 
     B. 03 LJUBLJANA 1166 

1.  (U) DCM, ACCOMPANIED BY POL-MILOFF AND ODC CHIEF, 
DELIVERED REFTEL TALKING POINTS TO MFA STATE SECRETARY FOR 
MULTILATERAL AFFAIRS SAMUEL ZBOGAR ON 10 MAY.  ZBOGAR, 
ACCOMPANIED BY STAFF ASSISTANT MATEJ MARN AND NORTH AMERICA 
DESK OFFICER GREGOR KOZOVINC, WAS GRATEFUL TO HEAR THAT IMET 
FUNDS WOULD BE RELEASED FOR THE REMAINDER OF THE FISCAL YEAR. 
 HE COMMENTED THAT THE MEMBERS OF THE SLOVENIAN ARMED FORCES 
(SAF) SCHEDULED FOR MILITARY TRAINING IN THE UNITED STATES 
WOULD BE ESPECIALLY THANKFUL FOR THE OPPORTUNITIES AHEAD OF 
THEM. 
 
2.  (U) WITH RESPECT TO AN ARTICLE 98 AGREEMENT, ZBOGAR FIRST 
STRESSED THE SLOVENES\' CONFIDENCE IN THE USG\'S ABILITY TO 
PROSECUTE CRIMES COMMITTED BY U.S. CITIZENS, NOTING THE ROME 
TREATY PREFERENCE FOR SOVEREIGN ARRANGEMENTS.  HE THEN 
EXPRESSED HOPE THAT THE U.S. WOULD SOME DAY \"SEE MERIT IN 
SUPPORTING OR POSSIBLY JOINING THE ICC.\"  ADMITTING THAT 
THERE HAD BEEN NO INTERNAL DISCUSSIONS AT MFA RECENTLY ABOUT 
SIGNING AN ARTICLE 98 AGREEMENT, ZBOGAR REFERRED TO AN 
EARLIER ROUND OF CONSULTATIONS THAT YIELDED A PROPOSAL FOR AN 
AGREEMENT COMPATIBLE WITH BOTH THE ICC STATUTE AND EU 
GUIDELINES.  DCM TOLD ZBOGAR THAT THE USG \"NEEDS MORE\" THAN 
THE GOS INITIALLY OFFERED.  ZBOGAR SAID THE GOS REMAINS \"OPEN 
TO FINDING A SOLUTION.\" 
 
3.  (SBU) COMMENT:  IN CHARACTERISTICALLY DIPLOMATIC STYLE, 
ZBOGAR LEFT OPEN THE POSSIBILITY FOR FURTHER DIALOGUE ON 
ARTICLE 98 BUT INDICATED CLEARLY THAT ANY AGREEMENT WOULD 
HAVE TO BE CONCLUDED WITHIN EU GUIDELINES.  AS WE HAVE 
REPORTED IN THE PAST, SLOVENIA IS MOST UNLIKELY TO BREAK 
    RANKS WITH ITS FELLOW EU MEMBER STATES ON THIS ISSUE, AS 
FOMIN RUPEL TOLD A/S BLOOMFIELD WHEN THEY DISCUSSED THE ISSUE 
LAST NOVEMBER (REF B).  END COMMENT 
YOUNG 
 
NNNN 
"
"16763","5/10/2004 13:46","04LJUBLJANA433","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 000433 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE, EUR/ERA, EB 
USDOC FOR 4232/MAC/EUR/EERIS/CEEBIC/BURGESS/ROGERS 
VIENNA FOR AG COUNSELOR 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR, ECON, ETRD, PINR, SI 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: COM CALLS ON NEW MINISTER OF 
AGRICULTURE 
 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
1.  (U) SUMMARY.  In a 04 May meeting, new Minister of 
Agriculture, Milan Pogacnik, told COM that Slovenia is 
\"prepared\" to adopt EU Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) 
guidelines, though not without some adjustment pains. 
Pogacnik also expressed a strong desire to work with 
the Mission in matters of mutual interest such as 
sustainable development, environmental protection, and 
in advancing the Doha Development Agenda.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (U) On 04 May, COM, accompanied by DCM, Econoff, 
and Econ Specialist, called on new AgMin Milan Pogacnik 
to congratulate him on his recent appointment as 
minister, and to seek his insights on the impact EU 
membership will have on Slovenia\'s agricultural sector. 
Dusan Vujadinovic, State Undersecretary for Agriculture 
and Marina Rojko, Public Relations, also participated 
in the meeting. 
 
The \"Technical Minister\" 
------------------------ 
 
3.  (U) Appearing relaxed and confident, Pogacnik 
described himself as the \"technical minister.\"  \"I am a 
technical minister, not a politician.  This is a new 
experience for me.\" [NOTE: Pogacnik has taught at the 
National Veterinary Institute for over thirty years. 
END NOTE].  He expects to apply the management skills 
gained running the Institute in his new capacity as 
minister.  \"I have experience running institutions, and 
here in the Ministry, I have the support of very 
knowledgeable and qualified colleagues,\" commented 
Pogacnik.  [NOTE: Pogacnik is a professor of 
Pathological Morphology, Forensic Veterinary Medicine 
at the National Veterinary Institute, serving as Dean 
since 1990.  He spent time in the U.S., conducting 
research in agro-forestry development.  As he told COM, 
\"my experience in the U.S. introduced me to the concept 
of sustainable development.\" END NOTE]. 
 
Common Agricultural Policy/EU 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
-------- 
 
4. (U) When COM asked Pogacnik about Slovenia\'s 
preparations to adopt the EU\'s CAP guidelines, he 
indicated that his predecessor had worked diligently 
and had prepared the framework for Slovenia\'s entry. 
\"Minister France But did excellent work at the 
Ministry, and in meetings with EU officials,\" Pogacnik 
observed.  The AgMin noted that dairy producers and 
small farmers would be most affected by CAP 
regulations.  Despite the possible displacement of some 
farmers, Pogacnik was hopeful that Slovenia\'s focus on 
environmental protection and rural development will 
preserve traditional farming.  Responding to COM\'s 
question regarding the loss of preferential trade 
tariffs with southeastern European countries, Pogacnik 
reported that the \"change would be negligible.\"  [NOTE: 
Slovenian farmers are expected to receive Euro 75 
million in 2004; Euro 84 million in 2005; Euro 89 
million in 2006.  Slovenia will implement CAP by 2007. 
END NOTE]. 
 
5.  (U) Pogacnik told COM that Slovenia will remain 
engaged in finding ways to foment free trade in 
agriculture in line with Doha Development Agenda 
principles.  He did not offer, however, any specifics 
on areas where Slovenia may encourage the EU to promote 
agricultural reforms based on the DDA. 
 
GMO 
--- 
 
6. (U) COM informed Pogacnik of the U.S.\'s interest in 
making sure that the EU suspends its self-imposed GMO 
moratorium, and of the costs associated with 
traceability and labeling requirements.  Pogacnik told 
COM that \"Slovenia is relatively conservative when it 
comes to GMOs.\" Slovenian farmers have opted for an 
\"organic agricultural production\" approach hoping to 
fill a niche.  Pogacnik added that much remains to 
educate consumers about GMOs, but offered no comment 
 
 
regarding Slovenia\'s stance on the EU\'s GMO moratorium, 
or costs associated with traceability and labeling 
requirements. 
 
BSE 
--- 
 
7.  (U) Pogacnik indicated that Slovenia follows 
\"strict controls\" when dealing with possible cases of 
BSE.  He reported that over 65,000 head of cattle are 
tested annually, and that new legislation is in line 
with EU directives.  The new legislation bans certain 
ingredients (i.e. -- cattle brains) from feed products. 
Pogacnik seemed to be content with the mechanism in 
place to prevent and control possible BSE outbreaks. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
8. (SBU) Pogacnik\'s ability to leave a mark in the 
Ministry will be limited.  The self-described 
\"technical minister\" understands that he is a caretaker 
until a new government is formed at the end of this 
year.  However, he did not rule out the possibility of 
staying on as AgMin if offered the position --\"never 
say never,\" he quipped when COM asked him about his 
future.  Pogacnik struck us as an open and frank 
interlocutor, genuinely interested in developing closer 
ties with the U.S. whether through educational 
exchanges or through other means.  END COMMENT. 
 
YOUNG 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"16793","5/11/2004 13:02","04LJUBLJANA438","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SECSTATE90991","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 000438 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE, EUR/ERA, OES 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV, EAID, ECIN, EWWT, PREL, SI 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: SAVA RIVER BASIN INITIATIVE 
REF: SECSTATE 90991 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
1.  (U) This cable responds to reftel request for 
information on the status of Slovenia\'s commitment to 
the establishment of a Permanent Sava River Basin 
Commission, the implementation of its mandate, and 
official representation.  On 05 May, MFA State 
Undersecretary and Stability Pact National Coordinator 
Janez Premoze discussed reftel questions with Econoff. 
Information below is keyed to questions posed in 
reftel. 
 
2.  (SBU) Does the GoS remain committed to working with 
the three neighboring Sava riparian states to establish 
a Permanent Sava River Basin Commission? 
According to Premoze, the answer is an unequivocal 
\"yes.\" The GoS will continue to move the process 
forward, setting the stage for the Commission to start 
as soon as possible.  He remarked that Slovenia has 
great interest in establishing the Commission because 
it is a \"forward looking project for all of the 
countries\" involved.  Although the Sava River is not 
navigable in Slovenia, Premoze pointed out that \"what 
happens downstream is important to us.\"  He mentioned 
that Slovenia sees the Commission serving various 
purposes; a sort of \"bypass used to resolve a number of 
outstanding issues in a multilateral forum.\"  Premoze 
reported that Slovenian companies are eager to 
participate in reconstruction projects, hoping to win 
some of the tenders issued for that purpose and floated 
the idea of the possible construction of a 
hydroelectric power plant on the Sava. 
 
3.  (SBU) Does your government support Zagreb as the 
location of the permanent Secretariat?  Will your 
government confirm its support via diplomatic note? 
Premoze confirmed that Slovenia will support Zagreb as 
the location of the permanent Secretariat as long as 
the other three countries stand by their April 2004 
commitments.  Premoze stated that the four countries 
agreed, in principle, that the Secretariat\'s location 
would be in Zagreb; that the Commissioner would be 
someone from Serbia and Montenegro; the Chairperson 
would come from Bosnia; and that the agreement\'s 
depository would be in Slovenia.  He hoped that the 
four countries will have ratified the International 
Agreement before the upcoming Stability Pact Meeting 
scheduled to take place 06-08 June in Portoroz, 
Slovenia. 
 
4.  (SBU) Who are the competent MFA authorities charged 
with overseeing the Sava River Basin Initiative?  Which 
line ministry has authority over this issue?  Who is 
the appropriate working-level contact?  Premoze 
explained that the MFA (his Office) will take the lead 
in establishing an Interministerial Working Group 
responsible for issues dealing with the Sava River 
Initiative [NOTE:  The line ministry holding the 
chairmanship is undetermined.  END NOTE]. He observed 
that in addition to the MFA, the Ministry of the 
Economy, the Ministry of Environment, and the Ministry 
of Transport will also be represented in this 
Interministerial Working Group.  Premoze added that the 
\"overall authority on the administration of the Sava 
River Basin Initiative will rest with the Cabinet.\" 
 
5.  (SBU) Who can vest your country\'s delegation with 
the authority to participate in the Interim Commission 
meetings and make commitments?  Citing his previous 
responses, Premoze explained that the Cabinet will take 
a final decision based on the Interministerial Working 
Group recommendations.  \"The issues will determine 
which line ministry will be in charge of staffing 
meetings,\" Premoze said. 
 
6.  (SBU) What resources is your government willing to 
dedicate to the establishment of/participation in the 
Interim and Permanent Commissions?   Premoze noted that 
a legal experts group will draft a Administrative 
Agreement dealing specifically with operational costs. 
In his view, each country will contribute one-fourth of 
the costs associated with running the Secretariat, and 
provide one-fourth of the total.  Unequivocally, he 
noted that Slovenia remains \"fully committed to the 
agreement.\" 
 
 
7.  (SBU) Do the projects listed below submitted by the 
four member states still represent your government\'s 
priorities?  Although reluctant to answer this 
question, Premoze identified item 11 as the GoS\'s 
highest priority.  [NOTE:  Item 11 is listed as 
\"Implementation of WFD -- Testing Guidance.  END NOTE.] 
He commented that the rest of the projects would have 
to be considered specifically. 
 
8.  (SBU) COMMENT: Premoze seemed genuinely upbeat and 
hopeful that a Permanent Commission will be operational 
by the end of the year.  In his view, this initiative 
lends credibility to the Stability Pact as a means to 
find solutions to common concerns.  Premoze\'s 
assessment on the feasibility and sustainability of 
this initiative is influenced by his role in the 
Stability Pact, as chair of one of pact\'s working 
tables.  Beyond his personal role, however, Premoze\'s 
statements illustrate a binding thread in Slovenia\'s 
overall security policy - the use of economic means and 
business opportunities to promote regional stability 
and national security in a multilateral forum.  And, 
the fact that the agreement protects the environment 
bodes well in an environmentally conscious country. 
END COMMENT. 
YOUNG 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"16900","5/14/2004 8:59","04LJUBLJANA453","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED","04USDAFAS665268","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS LJUBLJANA 000453 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
FOR SANDRA FARBER, USDA FOREST SERVICE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR, SI 
SUBJECT:  COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR FREDERICK GREEN 
 
REF: USDA FAS 665268 
 
1.  EMBASSY LJUBLJANA WELCOMES THE VISIT OF AND GRANTS 
COUNTRY CLEARANCE TO MICROBIOLOGIST, FREDERICK GREEN 
III, TO TRAVEL TO LJUBLJANA, SLOVENIA ON JUNE 04 - 14, 
2004, TO PRESENT PAPER AT THE WOOD PRESERVATION 
INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH GROUP ANNUAL MEETING. 
 
2.  THE CONTROL OFFICER FOR YOUR VISIT IS SILVIO 
    GONZALEZ, OFFICE PHONE: 386-1-200-5537, FAX: 386-1-200- 
5555, HOME TEL: 386-1-251-9670. 
 
3.  THE OVERALL SECURITY THREAT LEVEL FOR U.S. 
PERSONNEL AND INTERESTS IN LJUBLJANA, SLOVENIA IS 
CONSIDERED TO BE LOW.  SLOVENIA HAS A LOW CRIME RATE 
AND VIOLENT CRIME IS EXTREMELY RARE.  NONETHELESS, 
VISITORS SHOULD TAKE NORMAL SECURITY PRECAUTIONS AND 
ARE REQUESTED TO REPORT ANY SUSPECTED SURVEILLANCE OF 
THEMSELVES OR U.S. FACILITIES TO THE MISSION SECURITY 
OFFICE.  VISITORS SHOULD AVOID CARRYING LARGE AMOUNTS 
OF CASH AND JEWELRY ON THEIR PERSON AND ARE URGED TO 
USE SAFE DEPOSIT BOXES AVAILABLE IN HOTEL.  WHILE VERY 
UNCOMMON, THERE HAVE BEEN SOME INCIDENTS OF PURSE 
SNATCHING OR PICKPOCKETS, USUALLY AT NIGHT OUTSIDE OF 
BARS.  THE THREAT FROM INTELLIGENCE SERVICES REMAINS 
VIABLE, AND OFFICIAL VISITORS SHOULD TAKE APPROPRIATE 
MEASURES TO PROTECT CLASSIFIED OR SENSITIVE 
CONVERSATIONS AND DOCUMENTS.  CONVERSATIONS ON NON- 
SECURE LINES AND CELL PHONES SHOULD BE CONSIDERED 
SUBJECT TO COMPROMISE. 
 
YOUNG 
 
NNNN 
"
"17340","5/28/2004 10:23","04LJUBLJANA499","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE33359","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 000499 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/PPD, EUR/NCE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KPAO, OIIP, SI 
SUBJECT:  PUBLIC AFFAIRS INFLUENCE ANALYSIS: SLOVENIA 
 
REF:  STATE 33359 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified -- Please protect accordingly. 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary.  Slovenia has a very open information 
environment in which there is little, if any, overt 
censorship.  The media are critical and react strongly 
against any perceived attempts to influence the tenor of 
their reporting.  Nevertheless, they often fall short of 
journalistic standards of professionalism by blatantly 
mixing fact and opinion in their stories.  The media also 
exhibit a strong left-of-center bias.  This \"social 
democratic\" orientation is common to Slovenian academia 
and the NGO sector as well, and is reflected within the 
broader public, which welcomes American individuals and 
culture but remains critical of our foreign and (many of 
our) domestic policies. 
 
2.  (SBU) Summary cont\'d.  Generating influence with our 
policymaking audience requires tailoring our message to 
Slovenes\' sense of national interest.  The policymaking 
establishment is very legalistic and will typically strive 
to achieve consensus on major policy issues, even if it 
means hindering or delaying policy resolution.  To 
influence the broader public, we use the full range of PD 
tools and programs.  We believe strongly in creatively 
using all the resources at our disposal to promote mutual 
understanding in hopes of gradually chipping away at the 
knee-jerk reaction our policies elicit in the media and 
within certain parts of Slovene society.  End summary. 
 
3. (SBU)  Slovenia is a parliamentary democracy and 
constitutional republic, which provides for freedom of 
speech and of the press.  The information environment in 
many areas is very open.  Internet access rates are high, 
and government offices and private institutions have 
excellent and sophisticated websites.  Thus, Post can do a 
great deal of outreach and IRC work via the e-mail and the 
Internet. 
 
------------------ 
Media Environment 
------------------ 
 
4. (SBU)  The media environment in Slovenia, however, is 
more difficult.  It is complex and often opaque, very 
critical of the U.S., with major print media displaying a 
pronounced and admitted left-of-center bias.  Slovenia\'s 
recent history, combining communism and Tito\'s concept of 
\"self-management,\" has resulted in journalists who 
distrust governments in general, are quick to label 
information propaganda, jealously guard their 
independence, and see adopting an extremely critical 
stance as a natural part of their watchdog role and a way 
to make a name for themselves.  Too, when the press 
suspects it is being \"spun,\" it often reacts strongly and 
in the opposite direction. 
 
5. (SBU)  The above, combined with a uniform leftist bias 
(especially in the major national print media -- there are 
no right-leaning dailies), strong anti-American policy 
rhetoric, a deep identification with Europe (vs. America), 
deliberate efforts to be provocative, and journalists\' 
almost \"allergic reaction\" to the Bush administration, 
makes for a very hostile media environment for Embassy 
public affairs.  There is also a surfeit of editorials in 
the press and a tendency to mix straight reporting with 
editorial comment.   In addition, editorial writers seem 
to gather the news from secondary sources and compose 
their articles almost exclusively from what appear to be 
their own ideas and commentary, without than fleshing them 
out or substantiating them with outside quotes or ideas 
gleaned from interviews and other sources (like, for 
example, Tom Friedman of the New York Times). 
Investigative journalism as practiced in the U.S. also is 
not as developed in Slovenia, partially because editors 
are reluctant or unable to allow reporters to spend weeks 
developing, researching, and following a single story. 
The fact that access to information laws are new here and, 
in general, less information from government, individuals 
and companies is the public domain also affects reporting. 
 
6.  (SBU) The U.S. is also a large and easy target, and 
any journalist wanting to criticize U.S. policy only has 
to mention the Kyoto Agreement, the ICC and/or Guantanamo 
to score a point.  Media ownership is difficult to 
determine, as are exact political and economic pressures, 
which allegedly affect media reporting and result in some 
self -censorship. 
 
7.  (SBU) Public station TV Slovenia competes for 
viewership in the national television market with 
 
commercial station POP TV, and like most public TV 
stations in the region, has lost market share to POP and 
other cable stations.  While occasionally criticized for 
pro-government bias from some quarters, TV Slovenia news 
is trusted and watched.  National radio news (hourly) is 
also popular.  Because of its public mandate to educate, 
TV and Radio Slovenia have more news and public affairs 
programs on foreign policy issues, so we frequently turn 
to them when we have exclusive interviews and NATO or FPC 
tours, as they afford these stories more time and 
attention than commercial stations. 
 
8.  (SBU) Despite criticism from some quarters, media in 
Slovenia enjoy a high degree of public trust.  Monthly 
polling consistently puts media among the most trusted 
institutions.  While it is criticized and considered still 
to be in transition in some quarters, clearly, it is 
accepted by the general public.  Opposition figures, 
however, complain about media access and the fact that 
there are no center right dailies. 
 
9.  Major media turn out for Embassy press conferences, 
but judge all events with a very critical eye and 
attendance is by no means automatic or guaranteed.  The 
Mission can occasionally place op-eds, but with only three 
serious national dailies, all of which are left-of-center 
and cautious about taking our material.  We have to 
prioritize our placement efforts carefully and can take 
none for granted.  Also, the media here is looking for 
news and doesn\'t always consider messages on U.S. policy, 
which are relatively known and stable, to be news. 
Naturally, pieces by well-known figures, offered as 
Slovenia exclusives, are somewhat easier to place.    When 
we do place op-eds, papers often feel the need to quickly 
counter USG editorials with opposing pieces by local 
commentators and writers. Saturday supplements of major 
dailies are full of opinion and long \"think\" pieces by 
academics and local experts. 
 
------------------- 
The Slovene public 
------------------- 
 
10.  Many of our contacts and Slovene society, in general, 
might be described in U.S. terms as social democratic at 
heart, and many probably agree with the press\'s criticism 
of U.S. policy.  But often (or maybe just in person) they 
are not as strident.  Despite the press, Slovenes 
generally like and accept Americans and still admire and 
enjoy many aspects of American culture and society.  It is 
clear, however, when we go to the universities for 
discussions or debates that media criticism is being read 
and does have an effect on attitudes and our programming 
environment.  Non-state actors do play a role in media and 
policymaking.  University professors regularly write 
pieces for print media and are frequent guests on 
television talk shows, as are NGO representatives.  Many 
are from the center-left of the political spectrum, 
however, so do not contradict the general left-of-center 
media bias. 
 
 
------------------------------- 
Identifying our Target Audience 
------------------------------- 
 
11. (SBU) The primary audience for our MPP goal of 
encouraging Slovenia to promote political, economic and 
military reform in central and southeastern Europe 
consists of government policymakers, parliamentarians, 
members of the judiciary, military leaders, the media, 
academia, NGOs, and the general public. Some of the 
critical NGOs in this area include the International Trust 
Fund for Demining and Mine Victims Assistance (ITF), the 
Regional Center for the Psychosocial Well-Being of War- 
Affected Children in Southeastern Europe, and the 
Institution for Preventing Corruption. The newly founded 
NGO \"Forum 21\" may also prove to be a critical lobby. 
 
12.  (SBU) The main audience in the MPP goal area of 
improving Slovenia\'s ability to detect, interdict, 
prosecute and convict persons involved in transnational 
criminal and terrorist activities includes, in addition to 
the above groups, members of the police, customs, and 
border guards. 
 
13. (SBU) The primary audience in the MPP goal area of 
encouraging transparency, open markets, further 
privatization, and respect for the rule of law consists of 
policymakers in the Ministry of Finance and Economics, 
business leaders, financial institutions, and trade 
associations such as the Council of American States in 
 
Europe (CASE), AmCham Europe, and the Slovenia-U.S. Trade 
Promotion Board. 
 
-------------------------- 
The Policymaking Audience 
-------------------------- 
 
14. (SBU) Communication with our policymaking audience 
takes the form of demarches and official visits by senior 
Mission officers as well as interpersonal communication in 
less formal settings. Our IRC also makes contact with this 
audience and regularly reaches out by providing SDI 
profiles, e-newsletters, and other information products 
and by responding to inquiries for information on the u.s. 
Our ability to influence our contacts is contingent first 
on establishing cordial and professional relationships. 
Slovene policymakers understand that their national 
interest lies in promoting regional stability, counter- 
terrorism and anti-crime measures, and our stress on the 
congruence of their interests with ours generally leads to 
the greatest receptivity to our policies. Policymakers in 
particular have a keen and calculated sense of national 
interest that usually overrides the sometimes emotional 
sway one finds in the media or in academia. Another 
important attribute of the Slovenian policymaking 
community is the tendency to seek consensus on major 
policy issues. The close link between political and 
economic elites and the \"networked\" nature of Slovenian 
society result in a desire to burn as few bridges as 
possible and achieve maximal consensus. On major issues 
like NATO accession, this fervent desire for consensus has 
at times caused considerable delays in moving policies 
forward. It has also on various occasions severely 
complicated the policymaking process and put obstacles in 
the way of achieving a necessary resolution. 
 
15. (SBU) Communication with the current GOS leadership 
requires attention to a few details. First, PM Rop\'s 
interest in public policy is piqued whenever it is couched 
in terms of Slovenia\'s economic growth and development. 
Rop\'s primary interest is clearly economic policy and he 
often frames foreign and security policy issues from an 
economist\'s perspective. Second, the GOS leadership 
reportedly pays close attention to opinion polls and has 
even commissioned special polls for its own internal 
consumption. 
 
-------------------- 
Our broader audience 
-------------------- 
 
16. (SBU) In terms of our wider audience--the media, 
academia, NGOs, and the judiciary--post uses the full 
panoply of PD tools and programs in order to reach out to 
these groups. The Fulbright, Humphrey, IV programs, and 
NATO tours have enabled us to gain considerable access to 
senior administrators and influential voices in academia 
as well as to top officials in NGOs and the judiciary. 
These programs have generally had positive effects, 
although Slovenes have a historically-conditioned 
skepticism of government programs that makes them assume 
some programs must entail propaganda. Returned Fulbright 
and IV grantees often tell us about the high quality of 
their U.S. program and are invariably impressed with the 
diversity of views they encounter. Some grantees have even 
mentioned that their visit forced them to re-evaluate 
preconceived notions about the U.S. and led them to 
completely change their position on a given issue. Even 
without such wholesale change, however, returned grantees 
usually come back with a better understanding of the U.S. 
and a greater appreciation for how American society is 
organized and how public policies are made. Nevertheless, 
skepticism of current U.S. policy often remains firmly 
entrenched. 
 
17. (SBU) Our Information Resource Center (IRC) provides 
information on the u.s. to the general public through our 
Mission web site, targeted dissemination of informati9n, 
and also upon request. The IRC continuously engages in the 
promotion and marketing of our website to a wider audience 
and conducts briefings to encourage wider dissemination of 
our information products. The IRC director also manages 
the Embassy\'s book donation program and designs 
promotional materials and develops marketing strategies 
highlighting IRC products, programs, and services. 
Speakers from the u.s. also provide our wider audience 
with a valuable third-party perspective and help promote 
greater appreciation of u.s. society, culture, and 
institutions within Slovenia. Again, however, there is 
often a tendency to assume that speakers who come to 
Slovenia on an Embassy-sponsored program must have had 
their message pre-cleared. Because it is so difficult to 
 
find third parties in Slovenia who would represent a pro- 
U.S. position, speaker programs nevertheless remain the 
tool of choice for voicing third-party perspectives. 
Targeted DVCs also provide a valuable link between 
policymakers in the U.S. and in Slovenia and have in some 
cases led to remarkably long-lasting collaborative 
relationships, as in the case of several Slovene judges 
who participated in a DVC with Supreme Court Justice 
Anthony Kennedy. DVCs for the media must be carefully 
selected and judiciously used, however, since the media 
needs to feel they are getting useful information and a 
story out of the time and effort they put into attending 
the event. 
 
18. (SBU) Post engages the media and the general public by 
extensively using the Ambassador for interviews and 
appearances. We also take advantage of almost all USG 
visits for media opportunities to get our message out. We 
try to creatively use events to engage our audiences and 
to build trust and mutual understanding, whether it be 
with a ship visit, US Women\'s Fed Cup tennis, reception, 
or private student exchange. Finally, cultural grants and 
cultural programming provide us with access to a very 
useful set of contacts in the cultural community and help 
sustain a positive image of the U.S. even in the face of 
critical media coverage. 
 
------------------ 
COMMENT/CONCLUSION 
------------------ 
 
19.  (SBU)  The left-of-center orientation of the Slovene 
media and of much of Slovenian society will continue to 
produce criticism of our foreign policy.  Post will 
continue to engage our policymaking audience and the 
broader public by remaining highly visible and programming 
events that portray the U.S. in a positive light and 
counter negative views and misunderstandings of our 
policies.  We will continue to look for creative ways to 
draw attention to our values and to broaden Slovenes\' 
understanding of our policies and the motivations behind 
them.  Recent program events like our collaboration with 
the U.S. Women\'s Fed Cup Tennis Team to raise money for 
children mine victims received wide press coverage and 
portrayed the U.S. very positively.  By combining an 
auction of tennis equipment with a COM speech about how 
the U.S. tax system encourages charitable giving and 
volunteerism, we also got our message across about the 
importance of allowing market institutions to function in 
an unfettered and transparent manner.  Our programs must 
creatively reach out to our (many) audiences to showcase 
our diversity, openness, individualism and hard work.  We 
will build on recent efforts that include sponsorship of a 
film highlighting the diversity of U.S. society in the 
Ljubljana film festival, promotion of U.S. counter-TIP 
efforts through the screening of a feature film, and a COM 
visit to a local school for Deaf and hearing-impaired 
students.  Our continued presence and high visibility in 
such programs will mitigate the negative coverage we 
receive on some policy issues and provide better context 
for and understanding of our motivations.  End comment. 
 
YOUNG 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"17344","5/28/2004 11:58","04LJUBLJANA501","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04LJUBLJANA349","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 000501 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE, EUR/ERA, EB 
USDOC FOR 4232/MAC/EUR/EERIS/CEEBIC/BURGESS/ROGERS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, ETRD, PGOV, PINR, SI 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: COM CALLS ON NEW ECONMIN 
 
REF: LJUBLJANA 349 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified.  Please protect accordingly. 
 
1.  (U) SUMMARY: In a 26 May meeting, new Slovene Minister 
of Economy, Matej Lahovnik, told COM that the Ministry would 
like to make Slovenia even more \"internationalized.\"  He 
advocated a gradual approach to investments and to 
privatization, a process he said should be of equal access 
to both domestic and foreign investors.  He also stated his 
belief that Slovenia will be able to weather the effects of 
high oil prices and to fulfill successfully the ERM II 
criteria. END SUMMARY 
 
2.  (U) COM, accompanied by DCM, PolEconOffs, and Econ 
Specialist called on new Minister of Economy Matej Lahovnik 
to congratulate him on his recent appointment as Minister 
and to seek his insights into the state of the Slovenian 
economy and the impact of EU membership.  Dimitrij Grcar, 
State Undersecretary for Multilateral Affairs, and Metka 
Urbas, Head of Bilateral Department, also participated in 
the meeting. 
 
Internationalization of the Economy 
----------------------------------- 
 
3.  (U) Lahovnik (who is 32 years old and looks even 
younger) briefly explained his economic program, outlining 
two major objectives.  First, he wants to attract more FDI, 
in particular \"greenfield\" investments.  Lahovnik believes 
that despite a relatively expensive labor force, Slovenia is 
an \"attractive destination for foreign investors.\" 
Slovenia\'s highly skilled workforce and the desire of 
foreign companies to get a stronger foothold in the EU add 
to Slovenia\'s attractiveness.  He also sees opportunities 
connected with Slovenia\'s goal to become a bridge between 
the EU and the Western Balkans.  [Note: several countries 
and companies from the region expect Slovenia to play that 
role. End note.]  As a second objective, Lahovnik wants to 
accelerate the development of small and medium-size 
companies (SMEs) by reducing administrative barriers.  He 
has set in motion a \"one-stop-shopping\" process for SME 
permitting and applications at the ministry. 
 
Investments 
------------ 
 
4.  (U) Lahovnik did not answer COM\'s question of where and 
how Slovenia would like to see Americans invest.  Instead, 
he stated that a conservative, gradual approach to 
investment should be followed.  Lahovnik pointed out that 
Slovenia wants to attract more investments in order to 
create new jobs.  He is not against FDI, but does not 
support the takeover of Slovenian blue chip companies. 
Lahovnik admitted it is strange that the U.S. is ranked 12th 
among foreign investors in Slovenia.  [Note: Goodyear and 
Western Wireless International are the two largest US 
investors in Slovenia.  End note.]  He cited several 
difficulties for investors, especially land availability. 
He pointed out that Slovenian investors also \"have problems\" 
and stated that the government should provide equal access 
to domestic and foreign investors.  Lahovnik was more 
precise on Slovenia\'s outward investments, which are mainly 
in Southern and Eastern Europe.  Though figures are a small 
percentage of GDP, investments are important so that 
Slovenian companies can penetrate a larger market.  He 
believes that the government needs to provide Slovenian 
businesses with more information on Western European 
markets. 
 
Privatization 
-------------- 
 
5.  (U) \"Privatization of infrastructure is not my 
portfolio\", quickly explained Lahovnik.  However, he added 
that he is not against privatization and believes that the 
government should not interfere too much in the process.  He 
again stated the need for equal access to foreign and 
domestic investors, although he believes that there is no 
need to privatize all companies. He also added that 
privatization must be done gradually. (COMMENT: Lahovnik 
used the word \"gradual\" at least a dozen times during the 
meeting.  We saw it as a sign of very typical Slovene 
pragmatism when it comes to economic matters.  END COMMENT) 
 
Introduction of the Euro 
------------------------- 
 
6.  (SBU) Lahovnik said that the introduction of ERM II is 
essential for the Slovenian economy, in particular for 
 
 
tourism.  He understands the threats of the two-year 
probationary period, but does not expect a speculative, 
Soros-like currency attack because Slovenia\'s economy is so 
strong.  Lahovnik does not believe higher oil prices will 
prevent Slovenia from meeting the Maastricht criteria, since 
\"targets are flexible - calculated as an average of best 
performers within the EU, and they will also face similar 
problems.\"  However, he sees higher oil prices as a problem 
in the long run because they will decrease economic growth. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7.  (SBU) COMMENT: While Lahovnik lacks hands-on business 
experience, he has a good understanding of economic 
development.  He seemed somewhat nervous, yet easy going, 
during the meeting.  His two overriding objectives are not 
new in Slovenia, but no one has yet been successful in 
meeting them.  With just six months in office before 
elections, we shouldn\'t bet heavily on his chances for 
success.  If leading politicians understand and agree with 
his approach, however, he may get another ministerial term 
after the fall elections.  Lahovnik\'s bio was transmitted 
reftel.  END COMMENT. 
YOUNG 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"17411","6/2/2004 11:24","04LJUBLJANA511","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 000511 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE, EUR/ERA, EB 
TRANSPORTATION FOR FLAHERTY, BHATIA 
USDOC FOR 4232/MAC/EUR/EERIS/CEEBIC/BURGESS/ROGERS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EWWT, EAIR, ELTN, ECON, PREL, PINR, SI 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: SECRETARY MINETA\'S BILATERAL MEETING 
WITH TRANSPORT MINISTER PAVLIHA 
 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: On 25 May, U.S. Secretary of 
Transportation Norman Mineta and his visiting 
delegation called on his Slovenian counterpart, Marko 
Pavliha, to discuss the bilateral transportation agenda 
prior to the start of the European Conference of 
Ministers of Transport (ECMT) meeting held in Ljubljana 
on 26-27 May.  Secretary Mineta congratulated Pavliha 
on Slovenia\'s recent EU accession; provided the 
Minister with an assessment of the current U.S.-EU 
civil aviation talks; and offered technical assistance 
on projects related to the construction or upgrade of 
the two EU transportation corridors crisscrossing the 
country (Fifth and Tenth Corridors).  Pavliha expressed 
an interest in developing the right legal and business 
framework to increase freight rail usage.  A self- 
described \"friend of North America\" (he has family 
members residing in New Jersey, and is a graduate of 
McGill University in Montreal), Pavliha shared the 
Secretary\'s views on transportation security and the 
 
SIPDIS 
need to raise road safety awareness.  He was also 
hopeful that a fair and satisfactory U.S.-EU CivAir 
agreement could be reached soon.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (U) On 25 May, Secretary Mineta accompanied by 
Ambassador Young, DOT staff members John Flaherty, 
Karan Bhatia, and Emil Frankel, Econoff, and Econ 
Specialist called on Minister of Transport Pavliha. 
Bojan Babic, State Secretary for Aviation, Boris Zivec, 
State Secretary for Transport Policy and International 
Relations, Matjaz Vrcko, Chief of Staff, also 
participated in the meeting. 
 
BILATERAL RELATIONS 
------------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) Secretary Mineta congratulated Pavliha on 
Slovenia\'s recent EU accession and observed that its 
hosting of the European Ministers of Transportation 
Conference was a \"tribute and recognition\" of 
Slovenia\'s role in international affairs.  Although the 
U.S. and Slovenia do not have an Open Skies Agreement, 
Secretary Mineta expressed hope that a general civil 
 
SIPDIS 
aviation agreement between the U.S. and the EU would be 
reached soon (see paragraph 4).  Aware of Slovenia\'s 
transportation projects along the Fifth and Tenth 
Corridors, Mineta informed Pavliha of DOT\'s willingness 
and ability to provide civil aviation, road 
construction, and overall infrastructure technical 
assistance, should it be requested.  Mineta noted that 
the bilateral relationship remains strong and has been 
enhanced by Slovenia\'s entry into the EU. 
 
U.S.-EU CIVIL AVIATION NEGOTIATIONS 
----------------------------------- 
 
4.  (SBU) Mineta informed Pavliha about his recent 
talks on the general air services agreement with 
Commissioner Loyola de Palacio.  Hopeful that an 
agreement between the two sides may be reached by the 
end of June, Mineta told Pavliha that \"we are close to 
an agreement; just working on some of the specifics.\" 
Having served in his new position for one month, 
Pavliha\'s civil aviation knowledge is limited.  He 
indicated that Slovenia has adopted all of the EU 
transportation directives and has subscribed to its 
agreements.  He also explained, unequivocally, that 
Slovenia would like to play an active role in preparing 
new civil aviation agreements.  \"We are interested in 
cooperating, and in finding a common ground to enhance 
and to improve civil aviation services throughout 
Europe,\" Pavliha commented.   Bojan Babic, State 
Secretary for Civil Aviation and a 2003 civil aviation 
 
SIPDIS 
conference participant, observed that a national civil 
aviation program will be adopted in June as part of the 
new National Transportation Policy. 
 
MARITIME, RAIL TRANSPORT 
------------------------ 
 
5.  (SBU) Secretary Mineta expressed admiration for 
Europe\'s comprehensive short-sea shipping networks and 
outlined his efforts to encourage the same in the U.S. 
to ease road congestion.  In response, Pavliha noted 
 
 
that Slovenia faces land congestion problems because of 
the overwhelming use of highways for cargo.  Pavliha 
praised the success of U.S. policy encouraging the use 
of rail for cargo -- an area where Europe has much work 
to do as 70 percent of cargo is transported via roads. 
As such, he was interested in learning of incentives or 
mechanisms designed to encourage rail usage instead of 
highways for cargo transport.  The delegation responded 
that the U.S. has worked diligently on developing 
comprehensive logistics hubs (port-rail-truck).  This 
is an area, however, where the private sector has been 
the catalyst in developing sustainable and effective 
strategies, and as such an area where the GoS could 
provide incentives for private industry to do the same. 
 
ROAD SAFETY 
----------- 
 
6.  (U) Pavliha agreed with Mineta\'s statement that the 
international community must coordinate and increase 
its efforts to reduce the number of road traffic 
fatalities.  Pavliha explained that several years ago 
Slovenia instituted a road safety program similar to 
the American National Highway Traffic program.  Since 
then, annual road fatalities in Slovenia have been 
reduced from 300 to 150 victims per one million people. 
The use of alcohol, excessive speed, and inexperienced 
drivers were identified as the primary causes for 
traffic road fatalities in Slovenia.  Convinced that 
education is the best weapon to decrease road related 
accidents and deaths, Pavliha was interested in 
developing a program similar to the four E\'s Program 
described by Secretary Mineta (education of the driver, 
engineering of the roads, effective automobiles, and 
enforcement of the laws) \"I am a strong believer in 
education; reactive enforcement is less effective,\" 
indicated Pavliha. 
 
PRIVATIZATION 
------------- 
 
7.  (SBU) Addressing Mineta\'s inquiry on possible 
privatization schemes with respect to the seaport (Port 
of Koper) as well as the Ljubljana International 
Airport (Brnik) and the regional airport at Maribor, 
Pavliha stated the GoS has not yet made a decision on 
privatization.  He added, however, that outright 
privatization was unlikely as the GoS will remain the 
ports\' majority owner.  There is an interest in 
exploring possibilities for public-private partnerships 
through concessions.  \"I think we could explore the 
possibility of concessions in the future,\" Pavliha 
commented. 
 
EUROPEAN CONFERENCE OF MINISTERS OF TRANSPORT 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
8.  (U) The ECMT was held in Ljubljana on 26 and 27 of 
May.  Thirty-one ministers, along with senior 
representatives from all ECMT members, associate and 
observer countries attended the event.  The conference 
focused on transport infrastructure planning; fee 
collecting systems; transportation safety; elimination 
of obstacles at border crossings; and distribution of 
transport permits or \"multilateral quotas.\"  The 
ministers revised the 2002 Bucharest Declaration, 
approving a number of recommendations on container 
safety regulations. 
 
9.  (U) Secretary Mineta held bilateral meetings with 
Mexican Secretary of Communications Pedro Cerisola; 
Dutch Minister of Transport, Public Works, and Water 
Management Karla Peijs; Irish Minister of Transport 
Seamus Brennan; and Hungarian Minister of Transport 
Istvan Csillag. 
 
10. (U) Secretary Mineta\'s party did not have an 
opportunity to clear this cable before departure. 
 
YOUNG 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"17561","6/7/2004 13:30","04LJUBLJANA532","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 000532 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE, EB 
USDOC FOR 4232/MAC/EUR/EERIS/CEEBIC/BURGESS/ROGERS 
USDOC FOR MAC/ADVOCACY/NUGENT 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP, ELAB, ETRD, PHUM, SENV, AMGT, SI 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA:  EB/CBA MERMOUD RAISES THE STAKES ON 
WESTERN WIRELESS INTERNATIONAL CASE 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified.  Please protect accordingly. 
 
1.   (SBU) SUMMARY:  During his 28 May visit to Slovenia, 
Department of State Special Representative for Commercial 
and Business Affairs Frank Mermoud encouraged senior GoS 
officials, including the Minister of Information Society 
Pavel Gantar and State Secretary Matjaz Logar of the 
Ministry of the Economy, to continue market reforms; 
expressed the USG\'s desire to work closely with the GoS in 
light of Slovenia\'s membership in the European and 
Transatlantic organizations; and urged them to address U.S. 
Western Wireless International\'s claims pending before the 
Telecommunications Agency and the Competition Protection 
Office (CPO) expeditiously.  Minister Gantar promised to 
direct the regulator (the Telecommunications Agency) to 
respond to WWI\'s claims promptly and to make its analysis 
and findings public.  State Secretary Logar indicated that 
the CPO is diligently assessing WWI\'s arguments with the 
support of DG-Competition, and hoped for a prompt 
resolution.  Mermoud also hosted a business breakfast with 
representatives of U.S. firms operating in Slovenia, visited 
the International Center for Promotion of Enterprises, and 
concluded his visit with an exclusive press interview with 
the leading business newspaper, Finance, which attracted 
significant attention.  END SUMMARY. 
 
BUSINESS BREAKFAST 
------------------ 
 
2.  (U) Mermoud, accompanied by Chief of Mission, hosted a 
business breakfast with representatives from Goodyear, 
Merck, Microsoft, Pfizer and Oracle.  The business people 
described the challenges they face in Slovenia, highlighting 
the intricate business relationships that exist in a country 
of less than 2 million people, and their direct and indirect 
impact on business deals.  Richard Johnson, Goodyear\'s 
General Manager and AmCham President, criticized overly 
bureaucratic, cumbersome, and time consuming regulatory 
procedures, while Oracle\'s Vasja Herbst voiced concerns over 
the non-transparent government decision-making process in 
public procurement.  Merck\'s Helmut Deffner and Pfizer\'s 
Barbara Kosler expressed their displeasure over non- 
competitive market conditions, citing the current national 
drug reimbursement plan as an example.  Microsoft\'s Jaka 
Stele noted Slovenia\'s inadequate support of research and 
development opportunities and the lack of an integrated IT 
policy to stimulate the economy.  In general, however, the 
representatives find Slovenia a democratic, open economy 
with a talented labor force with tremendous potential. 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION SOCIETY 
------------------------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) Mermoud, accompanied by COM, Econoff, and 
Commercial Specialist called on Minister of Information 
Society Pavel Gantar.  Mirijam Sencar, Head of the 
International Affairs Department, Mojca Jarc, State 
Undersecretary from the Ministry, and Mira Zupancic, Chief 
Advisor to the Director of the Telecommunications Agency, 
participated in the meeting.  Mermoud provided Gantar with a 
succinct explanation of his position in EB/CBA, underscoring 
the office\'s responsibility to support U.S. businesses 
interested in foreign ventures, and to advocate on their 
behalf should they encounter obstacles in their markets of 
operation.  He proceeded to tell Gantar that his primary 
reason for visiting Slovenia was to follow-up on the current 
status of Western Wireless International\'s USD 200 million 
investment in Slovenia.  Mermoud thanked Gantar for his 
willingness thus far to work with the Ambassador and Embassy 
staff on this matter, reiterating the importance that this 
case has on future foreign investments in Slovenia.  Mermoud 
summarized WWI\'s claims arguing that Mobitel\'s monopolistic 
behavior has prevented fair and open industry competition, 
costing the company customers and contributing to 
significant financial losses.  He pointed out that WWI filed 
separate complaints before the Telecommunications Agency and 
with the Competition Protection Office last year, but that 
the company has yet to receive an official response to their 
claims.  Mermoud recognized the vital and cordial bilateral 
relationship, and explained that it would neither be 
desirable nor in Slovenia\'s interest to have a black mark as 
a result of this case. 
 
4.  (SBU) Gantar responded as he has in the past that there 
is \"room for three mobile telephony providers\" in Slovenia, 
reiterating his desire to keep WWI in the market.  He noted 
that WWI\'s complaint before the Agency did not fulfill the 
 
 
legal requirements, but it was because of his personal 
intervention that it was not dismissed on procedural 
grounds.  He explained that WWI entered a highly competitive 
cellular market.  Addressing WWI\'s arguments on the 
industry\'s retail price structure, Gantar acknowledged that 
low retail prices hamper Western Wireless\' ability to build 
its market share.  Nevertheless, low prices were the result 
of fierce competition between Mobitel and SiMobil - the 
second mobile telephony provider.  He continued to state 
that Mobitel\'s on-net/off-net tariff structure was not 
unusual when compared to those found in other EU member 
states.  Mira Zupancic presented an Agency-prepared market 
analysis showing that the EU\'s on-net off-net ratio is 0.05 
higher than in Slovenia (1.75 vice 1.7).  According to 
Zupancic, the analysis also showed that termination rates in 
the EU are 0.09 Euro, whereas Mobitel\'s rate is 0.15 Euro. 
Mermoud, however, remarked that the study also showed that 
Mobitel\'s market domination surpassed all EU countries.  At 
Mermoud\'s request, the Minister promised to make the 
analysis public, posting it on the Internet soon. 
 
5.  (SBU) Gantar continued on to say that the GoS had 
offered asymmetrical tariffs as a solution to WWI\'s 
predicament.  As a case in point, he indicated that SiMobil 
has taken advantage of the asymmetrical price termination 
model (whereby the Significant Market Player pays higher 
termination fees), increasing its number of pre-paid 
customers.  Instead of taking advantage of this opportunity, 
WWI continues to push for retail pricing control, which 
Gantar stressed the GoS will not support.  Although 
appreciative of the Minister\'s and staff\'s remarks and 
explanations, Mermoud asked that WWI\'s core question be 
addressed.  At the end of the meeting Mermoud asked the 
Minister to provide WWI a written response on their decision 
in a timely fashion.  Minister Gantar pledged to continue 
working to find a solution that will allow WWI to remain in 
the market. 
 
MINISTRY OF THE ECONOMY 
----------------------- 
 
6.  (SBU) Mermoud then proceeded to meet with State 
Secretary Matjaz Logar at the Ministry of the Economy. 
 
SIPDIS 
Logar, who is in charge of Domestic Access issues, welcomed 
Mermoud, highlighting that FDI promotion is a top priority 
of the new Minister and is included in the country\'s 
development blueprint entitled \"Benchmarks Slovenia.\" 
Addressing the WWI case in particular, he was quick to point 
out the independent Competition Protection Office (CPO) is 
the entity charged with investigating the validity of the 
claims.  Logar was aware that the CPO is coordinating its 
efforts with the staff of DG-Competition, focusing on 
developingQsessment tools. Citing the independent nature 
of the investigation, Logar could not provide Mermoud with a 
precise date when the report would be produced, but he 
promised to underscore the case\'s importance and the need to 
expedite the process with CPO staff. 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL CENTER FOR PROMOTION OF ENTERPRISES 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
7.  (U) Mermoud paid a visit to the International Center for 
Promotion of Enterprises (ICPE).  Established in 1974, ICPE 
is an intergovernmental organization made up of 19 member 
countries whose goal is to promote and support public and 
private sector enterprise development in developing 
countries and countries in transition.  As part of 
Slovenia\'s humanitarian assistance to Iraq, the GoS decided 
to use ICPE to train five Iraqi executives in management 
(executive MBA).  Mermoud expressed an interest in ICPE 
activities and complimented the director for the center\'s 
role in fostering business education in countries in 
transition. 
 
WESTERN WIRELESS REGIONAL REPRESENTATIVE 
---------------------------------------- 
 
8.  (SBU) Mermoud told WWI\'s Regional Manager Roger Blott 
that GoS officials consider WWI an important investment, but 
that work remains to be done in order for the respective 
government officials to take action.  \"The case has been now 
elevated to a political level,\" indicated Mermoud.  Blott 
thanked him for his efforts and promised that WWI will keep 
the Embassy in Ljubljana and Mermoud\'s office in Washington 
abreast of any changes or decisions made by the company. 
 
 
PRESS REPORTS 
------------- 
 
9.  (U) Mermoud concluded his visit to Slovenia with an 
interview with the leading financial daily, Finance.  In it, 
he stressed the need to establish transparent enforcement 
mechanisms to substantiate the legal framework.  Commenting 
on whether or not there is a lack of political will on the 
part of Slovenian authorities, Mermoud indicated that  \"I do 
not want things dragging on even more and that Vega -- its 
existence is important to quite a large number of people in 
Slovenia -- does not become a black mark in our relations as 
there are many business and investment opportunities.\"  The 
interview made the front-page news, and TV morning news. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
10.  (U) Post appreciates Mr. Mermoud\'s productive visit and 
well crafted message that conveyed the importance of fair, 
transparent, and open systems to our Slovene interlocutors. 
As a rising EU member state, enjoying a strategic location, 
Slovenia offers ample opportunities to U.S. investors.  The 
Mission stands ready to support U.S. firms in pursuing local 
opportunities.  We would like to reiterate the importance of 
the Commercial Specialist position we are losing at the end 
of the current fiscal year.  That specialist organized this 
visit and used his business contacts to create this 
successful program.  This work is vital to our MPP goals. 
 
11.  (U) Mr. Mermoud cleared this cable. 
YOUNG 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"17810","6/15/2004 12:34","04LJUBLJANA554","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS LJUBLJANA 000554 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EB/TRA, EUR/NCE 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR, SI 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: RESPONSE TO US-EU FIRST STEP CIVAIR 
 
 
AGREEMENT 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 124593 
         B. LJUBLJANA 0543 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  PLEASE PROTECT ACCORDINGLY. 
 
1.  (U) ON 15 JUNE, STATE SECRETARY FOR CIVIL AFFAIRS AT THE 
MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT BOJAN BABIC EMAILED ECONOFF THE 
FOLLOWING NOTE PROVIDING SLOVENIA\'S VIEWS ON THE U.S.-EU 
FIRST STEP CIVAIR AGREEMENT AS PER REF A. 
 
BEGIN TEXT OF NOTE 
 
THANK YOU FOR YOUR FAX MESSAGE REGARDING AMERICAN VIEWPOINT 
ON EU-US NEGOTIATIONS. 
 
WITH REGARD TO NEGOTIATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS AT THE COUNCIL 
MEETING IN JUNE WE HOPE THAT FURTHER PROGRESS CAN STILL BE 
MADE TO IMPROVE THE BALANCE CURRENTLY AVAILABLE. 
 
WE ALSO BELIEVE THAT THE STRONGEST POSSIBLE LINKAGE BETWEEN 
PHASE ONE AND PHASE TWO OF THE NEGOTIATIONS WOULD BE 
DESIRABLE TO ESTABLISH. 
 
WITH REGARDS TO FIFTH TO SEVENTH RIGHTS BEYOND THE EU, WE 
WOULD LIKE TO RESERVE OUR POSITION AT THAT STAGE. OUR 
POSITION WILL DEPEND ON THE CONTENT OF THE US OFFER AND OF 
WHAT OTHER EU MEMBER STATES AND THE COMMISSION (WITH THE 
MANDATE TO NEGOTIATE THE AGREEMENT) WILL DECIDE TOGETHER. 
 
END TEXT. 
 
2.  (SBU) COMMENT:  BABIC\'S RESPONSE IS IN LINE WITH OUR 
    EXPECTATIONS (REF B).  IT IS UNLIKELY THAT THE GOS WILL 
ESTABLISH AN INDEPENDENT POSITION ON THIS ISSUE, OPTING 
INSTEAD TO FOLLOW THE LEADERSHIP OF ITS TRADITIONAL EU- 
MENTORS, GERMANY AND AUSTRIA.  END COMMENT. 
 
NNNN 
"
"17947","6/18/2004 12:35","04LJUBLJANA576","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04LJUBLJANA547","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 000576 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR EUR DAS CONLEY and EUR/NCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, SI 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIAN OPPOSITION FORMS NEW POLITICAL \"FORUM\", 
WITH FOREIGN MINISTER RUPEL A FOUNDING MEMBER 
 
REF: A. LJUBLJANA 547 
 
     B. LJUBLJANA 258 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified.  Please protect accordingly. 
 
1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Hailed as a \"brilliant political move\" by 
some pundits, and criticized by ruling LDS party members for 
putting personal gain ahead of the national interest, FoMin 
Rupel joined many of his former DEMOS associates in 
establishing a new forum dubbed the \"Assembly for the 
Republic (AFTR)\" earlier this week.  The decision comes on 
the heels of the opposition\'s unexpected electoral success 
during Sunday\'s European Parliamentary elections, claiming 
four out of seven seats.  Presented as a non-partisan 
democratic institution, the organization is the opposition\'s 
answer to former President Kucan\'s Forum 21 political action 
committee, and represents a concerted push to unseat the 
ruling coalition in the upcoming fall elections.  Rupel\'s 
decision to join the AFTR, as well as his blunt and public 
criticism of his party\'s leadership (LDS), has attracted as 
much attention as the organization\'s establishment.  The 
AFTR\'s formation may reflect the start of a true evolution 
of Slovenia\'s political system in which we could see the 
streamlining of political parties and the formation of 
clear(er) and more idealogically distinct party platforms. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
THE ASSEMBLY FOR THE REPUBLIC (AFTR) 
------------------------------------ 
 
2.  (U) Following its surprising showing at the European 
Parliamentary elections (ref A), particularly Nova 
Slovenia\'s (NSi) victory over the senior government 
coalition Liberal Democracy Party (LDS), members of the two 
major right-of-center parties, the Slovenian Democratic 
Party (SDS) and NSi, along with like-minded academics, 
announced the establishment this week of \"the Assembly for 
the Republic (AFTR).\"  Presented as a non-partisan 
democratic institution seeking to overcome the politics of 
\"polarization\" by promoting non-partisan dialogue between 
all political parties and Slovenian citizens, the 
organization reunites a number of DEMOS members. [NOTE:  In 
1987, a group of Slovenian intellectuals that opposed the 
Communists gathered around the periodical Nova Revija and 
advocated abandoning the Communist system and introducing a 
pluralistic democratic system in an independent Slovenian 
state.  This movement gathered steam and contributed to the 
creation of the political coalition DEMOS in November 1989. 
In the first democratic elections in April 1990, DEMOS 
defeated the Communist successor party and formed the first 
Slovenian democratic government with Lojze Peterle as PM, 
Dimitrij Rupel as FoMin, and Janez Jansa as DefMin. 
Somewhat ironically, it was Peterle who led NSi to victory 
in Sunday\'s EP election.  END NOTE].  See para 9 for a 
complete listing of Assembly for the Republic members. 
 
3.  (U) In its press release, which was purportedly written 
by Rupel himself, the founding members expressed their 
concern that \"moderate politics\" were losing ground to a 
more leftist agenda in Slovenia. The night of the EP 
election, Rupel offered sharp, on-the-record criticisms of 
LDS saying that it had veered too much to the left.  The 
AFTR\'s communiqu also noted that its members\' biggest worry 
was \"the use of party connections for financial advantages, 
the unscrupulous abuse of capital and positions by cronies, 
political intolerance and an appetite for daily publicity 
and ratings.\" Members of the opposition parties, led by 
SDS\'s Janez Jansa and Nsi\'s Andrej Bajuk, have recently used 
extraordinary parliamentary sessions to examine allegations 
of corruption and abuse of power by government officials. 
The sessions have failed to produce any substantive results. 
The AFTR is due to hold its first formal session on 23 June. 
 
THE RIGHT\'S OWN VERSION OF KUCAN\'S FORUM 21? 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
4.  (U) In March, former President Milan Kucan formed Forum 
21 - a think tank ostensibly established to improve the 
decision-making by the country\'s political, social, and 
cultural elites (ref B).  Widely regarded as the 
establishment\'s think-tank cum political action committee, 
Forum 21 members hold influential government positions and 
lead the country\'s largest companies.  In fact, the leading 
financial newspaper concluded that Forum 21 members, through 
personal or by association with their companies, control 
 
 
over 60  of the shares traded on the Ljubljana Stock 
Exchange.  Business representatives are absent from the 
AFTR\'s membership list, but in light of parliamentary 
elections this fall, members claimed that \"the forum might 
turn into a winning coalition of democratic and nation- 
building parties.\" 
 
THE RUPEL FACTOR: REALIGNMENT OF POLITICAL TENDENCIES 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
5.  (U) After the EP election results were known, current 
FoMin and LDS member Dimitrij Rupel criticized the party\'s 
leadership for pursuing policies that go too much towards 
the left, and warned that the governing coalition needed to 
\"turn the wheel back in the right direction.\"  Two days 
later, the press release announcing the formation of the 
AFTR was published, with Rupel\'s signature among the very 
first to appear in the document.  Political pundits and 
insiders have qualified Rupel\'s move as politically 
\"brilliant,\" but critics have countered that the FoMin is a 
\"big man with small ideas\" and principles.  PM Rop, who has 
had highly public disagreements with Rupel over ministers\' 
appointments, foreign policy, and party direction, has 
limited his comments, likely in an attempt to diminish the 
significance of the new forum. [NOTE:  After some question 
about whether they could be in the same room this week, the 
FoMin did accompany Rop to the EU Summit in Brussels.  END 
NOTE]. 
 
6.  Anton Rous, Chairman of the junior coalition Pensioners\' 
Party (DeSus) expressed his indignation over Rupel\'s 
decision, noting that \"we will not demand Rupel\'s dismissal, 
but we expect him to step down on his own, and leave his 
post so his students might finally see him.\"  (Latter 
comment is a reference to Rupel\'s tenured professorship at 
the University of Ljubljana).  Borut Pahor, the National 
Assembly\'s Speaker and one of Slovenia\'s most popular 
politicians, noted that \"Minister Rupel has a right to 
personal judgments.\" Pahor added that he would not seek 
Rupel\'s dismissal as a coalition party member unless the 
relationship between the PM and the FoMin made it impossible 
for Slovenia to lead a successful foreign policy. \"We will 
not interfere in the freedom of individuals, in this case 
that of Minister Rupel.\" 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
7.  (SBU) The formation of the Assembly for the Republic may 
reflect the start of a significant political realignment in 
Slovenia.  Although the opposition\'s strong showing in EP 
elections set off warning signals throughout the coalition 
parties\' headquarters, it would be a mistake for the 
opposition to interpret the win as a mandate or a shift in 
political tendencies.  With less than one-third of the 
electorate voting, both the incumbent and opposition parties 
understand that they will have to energize their core 
constituencies and attract the undecided swing vote in the 
fall.  The AFTR\'s appeal and influence remains to be seen, 
particularly as its resources pale in comparison to Forum 
21, which is expected to support LDS.  AFTR\'s challenge will 
be to convince average voters that it is a credible 
alternative.  AFTR will have to attract voters who feel that 
the governing coalition has unfairly capitalized on 
connections at the expense of the nation as a whole.  And, 
all this depends on how and if AFTR decides to package 
itself for the campaign. 
 
8.  (SBU) Rupel\'s decision to join an opposition group is a 
savvy tactical move, likely having been orchestrated for 
sometime. Rupel understood that his influence in the LDS 
decision-making process had diminished dramatically.  The 
truth is that factions within his own party have leveled 
personal attacks and started legal investigations against 
him - investigations which legal experts have stated were 
\"purely political.\"  Although Rupel kept a low profile 
following his scathing criticism of the Government\'s support 
for Zdenka Cerar as Minister of Justice, he resurfaced to 
blame the LDS\'s EP elections defeat on its migration to the 
left of the political spectrum.  And now, he has signed on 
the dotted line to become a member of an opposition forum, 
attempting to capitalize on the center-right surge.  Rupel 
seems to have completely exploited Rop\'s political 
inexperience, and in many ways has humiliated the PM by 
somehow maintaining his Foreign Ministry posting while 
 
 
lambasting the PM\'s party. 
 
9.  (SBU) Although the two principal figures in Slovenian 
politics are supposedly above party politics, former 
President Kucan and President Drnovsek remain very 
significant power brokers.  Even though Drnovsek handpicked 
Rop to succeed him as PM and as LDS President, the young PM 
has developed a much closer relationship with Kucan than 
with his mentor.  Kucan\'s Forum 21 is the establishment\'s 
power base, gathering a number of former Communists and 
CEO\'s of state-owned companies.  On the other hand, the AFTR 
will attempt to establish its credibility by linking the 
current struggle to the past, when DEMOS pushed for an 
independent and democratic Slovenia.  We don\'t know the 
level of Drnovsek\'s involvement in the formation of the 
AFTR, but we certainly can see him sympathizing with its 
stated objectives.  END COMMENT. 
 
ASSEMBLY OF THE REPUBLIC MEMBERS 
--------------------------------- 
 
10.  (U) The following are the members of the Assembly of 
the Republic and their professions: 
 
-- Dimitrij Rupel, current FoMin; former Slovenian 
Ambassador to the U.S.; FoMin during DEMOS government. 
 
-Barbara Brezigar, recently confirmed as Slovenia\'s 
Representative to Eurojust, an EU institution focusing on 
legal matters; 2002 presidential election runner-up as an 
independent; served as a prosecutor for 20 years. 
 
-Peter Jambrek, Vice President of the Expert Council of SDS; 
former Constitutional Court Judge; Minister of the Interior 
in Bajuk\'s six-month government; former DEMOS member. 
 
-Niko Grafenauer, editor of Nova Revija, an alternative 
press publication that works to develop civil society in 
Slovenia; former DEMOS member. 
 
-Janez Jansa, President of SDS and DefMin from 1990-1994; 
former DEMOS member. 
 
-Andrej Bajuk, President of NSi; PM for six months in 2000. 
Born and raised in Argentina as a Slovenian expat, but now a 
Slovenian citizen, he received his BA and MA in Argentina as 
well as an MS and PhD from the University of California, 
Berkeley.  He worked for the Inter-American Development Bank 
in Washington, DC from 1975-1994 and in Paris from 1994- 
2000. 
 
-Drago Jancar, writer and publicist; former DEMOS member. 
 
-Mr. Tine Hribar, Professor of Philosophy and member of the 
Academy of Science and Art (SAZU); former DEMOS member. 
 
-Bostjan Zeks, President of SAZU and former professor at the 
Faculty of Natural Sciences, University of Ljubljana. 
 
-Frane Adam, Head of the Center for Theoretical Sociology at 
the Faculty of Social Sciences at University of Ljubljana; 
vocal political adversary of Forum 21 member Niko Tos. 
 
-Viktor Blazic, writer/publicist, mostly for Nova Revija. 
 
-Drago Demsar, attorney who defended Janez Jansa and three 
others in case brought against them by the Yugoslav Army. 
In 1988, Jansa was working for the popular magazine Mladina 
and was accused and convicted by the Yugoslav Army for 
disclosing an army plan of attack on Slovenia. After Jansa 
and the other three were arrested, Slovene civil society 
organized a Human Rights association and demonstrated for 
their release.  This case furthered the push for Slovenian 
independence. He was also a member of DEMOS. 
 
-Tone Jerovsek, ex-Constitutional Court Judges and member of 
Bajuk\'s Government (2000); professor at the Law Faculty, 
University of Ljubljana; former DEMOS member. 
 
-Lovro Sturm, ex-Constitutional Court Judge and member of 
Bajuk\'s Government (2000); professor at the Law Faculty, 
University of Ljubljana; former DEMOS member. 
 
-Grega Virant, State Secretary at the Ministry of Interior, 
in charge of governmental administrative reform; professor 
 
 
at the Slovenian Police Academy. 
 
-Matjaz Sinkovec, Slovenian Ambassador to NATO in Brussels; 
SDS party member who was very public about his pacifism; 
former DEMOS member. 
 
-Ivan Stuhec, member of the Secretariat of the Slovenian 
Bishop Conference. 
 
-Dane Zajc, poet; former DEMOS sympathizer and contributor. 
 
-Aleksander Zorn, editor at Mladniska knjiga, the largest 
publishing house in Slovenia. 
 
-Ivo Urbancic, member of the Managing Board of Slovenska 
Matica, a literary society which focuses on philosophy and 
the preservation of Slovenian culture. 
 
-Ljubo Sirc, economist, LDS\'s candidate for President of the 
Republic in 1992, head of the Centre for Research into 
Communist Economies in London. 
 
-Vasko Simoniti, professor of history at University of 
Ljubljana and organizer of Brezigar\'s presidential campaign 
in 2002. 
 
-Mr. Andrej Rahten, Vice President of the Slovenian Pan- 
European Movement which connects members of the Slovenian 
Diaspora. 
 
-Dean Komel, philosopher. 
 
-Matej Makarovic, professor of Sociology at the Faculty of 
Social Sciences at University of Ljubljana. 
 
-Sasa Slavec, profession unknown. 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"18188","6/28/2004 8:32","04LJUBLJANA599","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04LJUBLJANA576|04LJUBLJANA597","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 000599 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINR, SI 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: CENTER-RIGHT OPPOSTION PARTIES FORM NEW 
GROUP WITH MEMBERS OF THE RULING COALITION IN ATTENDANCE 
 
REF: A. LJUBLJANA 576 
     B. LJUBLJANA 597 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified.  Please protect accordingly. 
 
1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: The Assembly for the Republic (AFTR) held 
an inaugural public meeting on 23 June reuniting DEMOS 
members, drawing like-minded academics, and gathering 
considerable media attention (ref A).  The AFTR continued to 
press its message for inclusion and national renovation in 
an attempt to rekindle the spirit of the DEMOS movement, 
which successfully sought Slovenian independence.  Speakers 
at the AFTR event also accused the ruling LDS party of 
having been hijacked by a left-wing faction of \"vulgar 
liberals.\"  The presence of FoMin Rupel, who returned to 
Slovenia via charter plane from London in open defiance of 
his party\'s (LDS) ultimatum not to participate, captivated 
the audience and media present.  [NOTE: PM Anton Rop 
dismissed Rupel the following day. Ref B.  END NOTE].  Peter 
Jambrek, member of the Slovenian Democratic (SDS) Party and 
newly designated AFTR President; former MP and MEP-elect 
Alojz Peterle, New Slovenia (NSi); SDS President Janez 
Jansa; and NSi President Andrej Bajuk, addressed the crowd. 
Rupel, who was consequently dismissed as FoMin (ref B) for 
his political realignment with AFTR, will not sail quietly 
into the night.  Furthermore, what he has to say in the 
coming months about the LDS, and particularly about Rop\'s 
leadership of the party, could have broad repercussions in 
the political frenzy leading up to this fall\'s parliamentary 
election.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (U) On 23 June, PDO attended an inaugural public meeting 
of the Assembly for the Republic (AFTR).  The meeting was 
held in the same venue where former President Kucan\'s Forum 
21 was established, signifying the extent to which the AFTR 
has modeled itself as a political counterweight and 
alternative to Forum 21.  Borut Pahor, President of the 
National Assembly, one of the most popular political figures 
in Slovenia and the leader of junior coalition partner 
United List, attended the inaugural meeting as a \"guest of 
honor.\"  Tine Hribar, a well-known philosopher, also spoke. 
 
AFTR - NOT RIGHT, NOT LEFT, BUT FOR SLOVENIA 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
3.  (U) Peter Jambrek, AFTR President, explained that the 
Assembly was established as a public forum to discuss the 
future of Slovenia as a NATO and EU member (ref A).  He 
explained that the AFTR was an \"open forum\" for all who 
wished to join and unequivocally noted that it was neither 
left-wing nor right-wing.  \"The purpose of the AFTR is to 
find an alternative to the current situation in Slovenia and 
put the country back on the right path.\"  He mentioned that 
the convening of the AFTR was an attempt to revive the ethos 
of DEMOS and to gather a like-minded group of politicians 
and intellectuals to once again set Slovenia on the right 
path towards democracy.  As he put it, DEMOS helped lead 
Slovenia to independence, democratic rule, and a free market 
in the late 1980\'s.  A similar organization was now needed 
to rectify the \"grave problems\" within Slovenian democracy. 
Jambrek also pointed out the need to establish a genuinely 
liberal market economy, calling for lower taxes, open and 
fair competition, and less interference from the State. 
 
4. (U) For his part, Peterle said that the AFTR needed to 
stay the course of multi-partisanship and commented, \"We 
should stop those that are stopping Slovenia.\" 
 
HRIBAR: LDS AS THE \"VULGAR LIBERALS\" 
------------------------------------ 
 
5.  (U) A visibly nervous Tine Hribar stated that the LDS 
coalition had led the country into an era of corruption and 
false democracy, openly calling for the establishment of a 
new center-right party patterned after DEMOS.  He labeled 
the LDS \"vulgar liberals,\" claiming that the party had 
perverted the true meaning of liberalism, and described the 
LDS\'s style of governance as \"Leninist\" -- \"if you are not 
with us you are against us.\"  Hribar also spoke of the need 
to form a center-right party that would work together with 
the Church, but that would also appeal to middle-of-the-road 
voters. 
 
JANSA: \"MEDIA MONOPOLY\" 
 
 
------------------------ 
 
6.  (U) SDS\'s Jansa accused the ruling coalition of having 
established a \"media-financial monopoly\" within Slovenia, 
and claimed that certain opinions \"never get printed in our 
media.\"  He also accused a \"left-wing faction\" within the 
LDS of initiating a \"culture war\" by pitting different 
sections of Slovenian society against each other.  He did 
say, however, that the participation of Rupel and Pahor in 
the AFTR - both as representatives of the ruling coalition - 
boded well for the future and for the establishment of a new 
political order in Slovenia. 
 
MEMBERS OF THE GOVERNING COALITION SPEAK 
----------------------------------------- 
 
7.  (SBU) Invited as the guest of honor, Pahor was the only 
governing coalition member besides Rupel to address the 
group.  In his opinion, there is no need to form another 
version of DEMOS \"because there is no radical conflict or 
break up as there was 14 years ago.\"  He did signal, 
however, the need for change in the current political 
situation by stating that more multi-partisanship was needed 
because there can be no progress without it. [COMMENT: There 
has been speculation that Pahor\'s attendance was to provide 
\"political cover\" for Rupel, so that Rupel would not be the 
only governing coalition member in attendance and, 
therefore, have some added job security.  The \"cover,\" 
obviously, was not adequate, as Rupel\'s dismissal was 
announced by Rop on 24 June.  END COMMENT. ] 
 
 
8.  (U) FoMin Rupel received a noisy welcome as he made it 
back to Ljubljana in time for the meeting despite the 
attempts by the LDS leadership to prevent his attendance. 
Rupel\'s Nova Revija friends funded a charter plane from 
London to make sure the FoMin made it back on time.  [NOTE: 
In 1987, a group of Slovenian intellectuals that opposed the 
Communists gathered around the periodical Nova Revija and 
advocated abandoning the Communist system and introducing a 
pluralistic democratic system in an independent Slovenian 
state.  This movement gathered steam and contributed to the 
creation of the political coalition DEMOS in November 1989. 
In the first democratic elections in April 1990, DEMOS 
defeated the Communist successor party and formed the first 
Slovenian democratic government with Lojze Peterle as PM, 
Dimitrij Rupel as FoMin, and Janez Jansa as DefMin. END 
NOTE].  On 21 June, the LDS Executive Council met to debate 
Rupel\'s having signed the document establishing the AFTR, 
and had instructed him not to attend the inaugural meeting. 
PM Anton Rop, talking on behalf of the party, stated that 
the AFTR is more of an \"Assembly for the [opposition] SDS\" 
which is why the LDS expected that Rupel would refrain from 
taking part \"in meetings that go against the LDS.\"  Rop, 
however, added that the Executive Council does not have the 
power to decide on Rupel\'s fate as minister, a decision that 
only he and Parliament can decide. 
 
PRESIDENT DRNOVSEK\'S REACTION TO AFTR 
------------------------------------- 
 
9.  (SBU) Earlier in the week, President Janez Drnovsek told 
the press that he had nothing special to say about Rupel and 
AFTR and added that too much attention is being paid to it. 
He also stated that Slovenia is a free country where people 
can freely express their opinion and freely take part in 
gatherings of any sort.  Finally, he assumed an apolitical 
stance by asserting that the role of President must remain 
distanced from political initiatives.  [COMMENT: Still, we 
think that Drnovsek is happy to see a group form to 
counterbalance his rival Kucan\'s new Forum 21.  END 
COMMENT.] 
 
COMMENT 
-------- 
10.  (SBU) The Assembly for the Republic has not disguised 
its aspirations to become the focal organization of 
Slovenia\'s center-right and the principal challenge to 
former President Kucan\'s Forum 21, the biggest alliance of 
leftist politicians and industrialists.  It remains to be 
seen if the AFTR will remain a temporary alliance of 
convenience or whether it will crystallize into a genuine 
political organization uniting parties of the center-right. 
The association with FoMin Rupel could play a role in 
 
 
determining whether or not AFTR will be successful.  The 
left-of-center media have been highly critical of Rupel and 
have generally been disparaging of AFTR.  The Slovenian 
daily Dnevnik called Rupel a \"capricious and conceited 
politician\" and predicted that he would turn on this new 
organization like he turned on his current party, LDS. 
Rupel\'s dismissal from the government might indicate a 
stronger identification with AFTR.  Furthermore, what Rupel 
has to say about the LDS, particularly Rop\'s leadership (or 
lack thereof) will matter in an election where the political 
factions (intra and inter party) may seek to redefine their 
positions.  The main question remains, however, whether or 
not a significant political realignment will occur before 
the fall national elections and, if it does and the center- 
right emerges victorious, whether or not its constituent 
parties will be able to put aside differences and rule 
successfully.  END COMMENT. 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"18548","7/9/2004 7:25","04LJUBLJANA636","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04LJUBLJANA623","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 LJUBLJANA 000636 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, SI 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: RESIGNATIONS AND REALIGNMENTS IN NATIONAL 
ASSEMBLY 
 
REF: A. LJUBLJANA 623 
 
         B. LJUBLJANA 600 
     C. LJUBLJANA 597 
     D. LJUBLJANA 547 
     E. LJUBLJANA 634 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  PLEASE PROTECT ACCORDINGLY. 
 
1.  (U) SUMMARY: OVER THE COURSE OF THE LAST WEEK, THE 
SLOVENIAN NATIONAL ASSEMBLY HAS SEEN A NUMBER OF CHANGES. 
THE FORMER FOMIN DIMITRIJ RUPEL, WHO WAS DISMISSED ON 05 
JULY (REFS A, B, C AND E), HAS ALIGNED HIMSELF WITH THE 
OPPOSITION DEPUTY GROUP SLOVENIAN DEMOCRATIC PARTY (SDS), 
WHICH HAS NOMINATED HIM FOR THE POST OF DEPUTY SPEAKER OF 
PARLIAMENT.  NATIONAL ASSEMBLY PRESIDENT BORUT PAHOR, OF 
UNITED LIST (ZLSD), RESIGNED HIS POSITION ON 07 JULY IN 
ORDER TO TAKE HIS SEAT IN THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT (EP).  IN 
ADDITION TO PAHOR, THREE MORE MPS ARE SET TO RESIGN TO TAKE 
THEIR SEATS IN THE EP.  END SUMMARY. 
 
RUPEL ALIGNS WITH OPPOSITION 
------------------------------ 
 
2.  (U) IN THE SAME WEEK THAT HE WAS DISMISSED AS FOMIN BY 
PARLIAMENT AND LEFT THE RULING LDS (REFS A, B, C AND E), 
DIMITRIJ RUPEL HAS ALIGNED WITH THE OPPOSITION SLOVENIAN 
DEMOCRATS (SDS) WITHOUT FORMALLY JOINING THE PARTY.  SDS 
PRESIDENT AND FELLOW MP JANEZ JANSA STATED AT A PRESS 
CONFERENCE THAT SDS HAS WORKED WELL WITH RUPEL \"MOST OF THE 
TIME,\" AND THAT \"WE THINK THAT WE CAN COOPERATE WELL ALSO IN 
THE FUTURE.\"  [NOTE: COM AND DCM MET WITH RUPEL ON 08 JULY. 
PLEASE REFER TO REF E FOR MORE DETAILS.  END NOTE.] 

PARLIAMENT\'S LEADERSHIP TO TAKE NEW SHAPE 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
3.  (U) THE PRESIDENT OF THE SLOVENIAN NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 
BORUT PAHOR RESIGNED HIS POST ON 07 JULY TO GIVE HIS UNITED 
LIST (ZLSD) COLLEAGUES AND OTHER MPS AMPLE TIME TO ELECT A 
NEW PRESIDENT.  PAHOR WON A SEAT IN LAST MONTH\'S EUROPEAN 
PARLIAMENTARY (EP) ELECTIONS.  SINCE THE POSTS OF MEP AND MP 
CANNOT BE OCCUPIED AT THE SAME TIME, PAHOR\'S TERM IN OFFICE 
AS PRESIDENT OF THE PARLIAMENT WOULD HAVE ENDED WHEN HE 
JOINED THE EP LATER THIS MONTH.  PAHOR HAS HELD THE 
PRESIDENT\'S CHAIR SINCE NOVEMBER 2000. DURING HIS TERM, HE 
HAS HELPED GUIDE THE PARLIAMENTARY PROCEDURES AND 
LEGISLATION WHICH ENABLED EU AND NATO ACCESSION.  PAHOR AND 
HIS PARTY HAVE NOMINATED ZLSD MP FERI HORVAT AS NEW 
PRESIDENT OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY.  [NOTE: ACCORDING TO THE 
COALITION AGREEMENT, ZLSD HAS THE RIGHT TO THE POSITION OF 
PRESIDENT OF PARLIAMENT.]  ALTHOUGH NATIONAL ELECTIONS WILL 
BE HELD IN THE FALL, THE NEW PRESIDENT WILL HAVE THE 
DEMANDING TASK OF PREPARING THE FIRST SESSION OF THE NEW 
PARLIAMENT.  THE PRESIDENT OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY BECOMES 
PRESIDENT OF SLOVENIA IF THE INCUMBENT BECOMES 
INCAPACITATED, RESIGNS, OR DIES.  THE VOTE FOR THE NEW 
PRESIDENT OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY IS SCHEDULED FOR 12 JULY, 
BY SECRET BALLOT. ELECTION REQUIRES AN ABSOLUTE MAJORITY 
(46) OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLY MEMBERS, AND MOST BELIEVE HORVAT 
WILL BE APPROVED. 
 
RUPEL AS DEPUTY SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT? 
--------------------------------------- 

4.  (U) ALTHOUGH RUPEL IS NOT AN OFFICIAL MEMBER OF SDS, THE 
PARTY ANNOUNCED ON 07 JULY THAT IT WOULD PROPOSE RUPEL FOR 
THE POST OF DEPUTY SPEAKER AFTER THE CURRENT HOLDER OF THE 
POSITION, SDS MP MIHA BREJC, RESIGNED ON 08 JULY TO BE AN 
MEP.  [NOTE: UNDER THE PARLIAMENTARY RULES OF PROCEDURE, THE 
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY HAS UP TO THREE DEPUTY SPEAKERS, ONE OF 
WHOM IS A MEMBER OF THE LARGEST OPPOSITION PARLIAMENTARY 
FACTION, I.E. SDS.  END NOTE.]  LDS, THE GOVERNING COALITION 
PARTY THAT RUPEL LEFT THIS WEEK, HAS YET TO COMMENT ON 
RUPEL\'S NOMINATION SAYING THAT THEY WILL WAIT UNTIL IT 
BECOMES \"OFFICIAL\" FOLLOWING PROPER, PARLIAMENTARY 
PROCEDURE.  ZLSD HAS STATED THAT IT SEES RUPEL\'S NOMINATION 
AS \"A REWARD FOR RUPEL\'S POLITICAL TRANSFER\" AND WILL DO 
EVERYTHING POSSIBLE TO KEEP RUPEL FROM THE POSITION.  THE 
SLOVENIAN NATIONALIST PARTY (SNS) STATED THAT IT WOULD NOT 
SUPPORT RUPEL WHILE NEW SLOVENIA (NSI) HAS STATED THAT IT 
WOULD SUPPORT HIM.  THE PENSIONER\'S PARTY (DESUS) AND THE 
PEOPLE\'S PARTY (SLS) HAVE YET TO GIVE A POSITION PUBLICLY. 
[COMMENT: SINCE DESUS IS ALSO A MEMBER OF THE GOVERNING 
COALITION, ONE CAN IMAGINE THAT IT WOULD ALSO VOTE AGAINST 
RUPEL.  END COMMENT].  RUPEL WILL ALSO HAVE TO OBTAIN 
 
LJUBLJANA 00000636  002 OF 002 
 
 GIVEN THE GREAT RESISTANCE 
TO HIS CANDIDACY, HIS SUCCESS IS CONSIDERABLY LESS CERTAIN 
THAN HORVAT\'S. 
 
TWO MORE MPS RESIGN, REPLACEMENTS HAVE BEEN DETERMINED 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
5.  (U) IN ADDITION TO PAHOR AND BREJC, MPS JELKO KACIN 
(SDS) AND LOJZE PETERLE OF NEW SLOVENIA (NSI) MUST RESIGN IN 
ORDER TO TAKE THEIR SEATS IN THE EP.  ALL FOUR MPS ARE VERY 
INFLUENTIAL IN THEIR PARTIES, IN THE SLOVENIAN POLITICAL 
SYSTEM, AND IN PARLIAMENT.  HOWEVER, SINCE THEY WILL ONLY 
MISS THE SESSION NEEDED TO OFFICIALLY REPLACE THEM, THERE IS 
LITTLE LIKELIHOOD THAT THEIR ABSENCES WILL HAVE MUCH EFFECT 
ON THE LEGISLATIVE PROCESS BEFORE THE FALL ELECTIONS. 
 
THE REPLACEMENTS 
----------------- 
 
6.  (U) THE FOLLOWING ARE SHORT BIOGRAPHIES FOR FERI HORVAT, 
NOMINATED FOR PRESIDENT OF PARLIAMENT, AND FOR THE FOUR MPS 
REPLACING THOSE WHO WON SEATS IN THE EP. 
 
--FERI HORVAT HAS BEEN AN ZLSD MP IN THE SLOVENIAN NATIONAL 
ASSEMBLY SINCE 1992.  PRIOR TO THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY, HE WAS 
THE GENERAL MANAGER OF RADENSKA, A THERMAL WATER COMPANY; A 
MEMBER OF THE MANAGING BOARD OF LJUBLJANSKA BANKA; AND WAS A 
MEMBER OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THE FORMER YUGOSLAVIA IN CHARGE 
OF INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC RELATIONS AND TOURISM.  HE HAS A 
BA IN ECONOMICS FROM THE UNIVERSITY OF LJUBLJANA AND IS 62 
YEARS OLD. 

-- BREDA PECAN (ZLSD) IS THE MAYOR OF DOMZALE AND IMPORTANT 
MEMBER OF THE ZLSD WOMAN\'S FORUM.  PECAN WILL FILL PAHOR\'S 
SEAT. 
 
-- DARJA LAVTIZAR BEBLER IS THE FORMER SLOVENIAN AMBASSADOR 
TO THE COUNCIL OF EUROPE IN STRASBURG AND A MEMBER OF LDS. 
SHE WAS AN LDS MP FROM 1992 UNTIL 1996.  [NOTE: HER HUSBAND 
IS ANTON BEBLER, AN IMPORTANT EMBASSY CONTACT, PRESIDENT OF 
THE ATLANTIC COUNCIL OF SLOVENIA AND FORMER SLOVENIAN 
AMBASSADOR TO THE UN IN GENEVA.  END NOTE.] BEBLER WILL BE 
FILLING JELKO KACIN\'S SEAT. 
 
-- SINISA GERMOVSEK IS A MEMBER OF SDS AND WILL BE REPLACING 
MIHA BREJC. 
 
-- MATJAZ FALKNER IS A MEMBER OF NEW SLOVENIA (NSI).  HE 
WILL BE TAKING LOJZE PETERLE\'S SEAT. 
 
5.  (SBU) COMMENT: WITH NATIONAL ELECTIONS SCHEDULED FOR THE 
FALL, ONE SHOULD REMEMBER THAT THE EVENTS CURRENTLY 
UNFOLDING COULD BE ATTRIBUTED TO PRE-ELECTION POSITIONING. 
THE GOVERNING COALITION WAS DEALT A LOSS IN THE RECENT 
EUROPEAN PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (REF D), AND THIS BLOW HAS 
CONTRIBUTED TO THE OPPOSITION\'S EFFORTS TO GARNER MORE 
SUPPORT AHEAD OF THE FALL PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS, WHILE THE 
RULING COALITION WORKS TO SECURE ITS BASE. 
 
6.  (SBU) ALTHOUGH PAHOR WILL TAKE HIS SEAT IN THE EP LATER 
THIS MONTH, HE HAS STATED THAT HE WILL ALSO RUN IN THE FALL 
ELECTIONS.  PAHOR IS A VERY POPULAR POLITICIAN AS EVIDENCED 
    BY HIS WINNING A SEAT IN THE EP, THROUGH PREFERENTIAL 
VOTING, DESPITE BEING AT THE BOTTOM OF HIS PARTY\'S LIST (REF 
D).  ACCORDING TO CONVENTIONAL WISDOM, WITHOUT PAHOR AS A 
CANDIDATE, ZLSD WOULD MOST LIKELY NOT CROSS THE THRESHOLD 
FOR A PLACE IN PARLIAMENT IN THE FALL ELECTIONS.  ALTHOUGH 
PAHOR HAS BEEN DISTANCING HIMSELF FROM HIS PARTY, POSSIBLY 
PREPARING A BID FOR THE PRESIDENCY IN 2007, HIS PARTY 
UNDERSTANDS THAT IT NEEDS HIM AND WILL, AT LEAST FOR NOW, 
LIKELY IGNORE HIS ATTEMPTS TO REINVENT HIMSELF.  IF ZLSD IS 
ONCE AGAIN INVITED INTO THE GOVERNING COALITION AFTER THE 
FALL ELECTIONS, PAHOR COULD HAVE A MINISTERIAL POSITION 
OFFERED TO HIM.  WE THINK HE FAVORS THE FOREIGN MINISTRY. 
END COMMENT. 
 
YOUNG 
 
NNNN 
"
"18565","7/9/2004 13:11","04LJUBLJANA646","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 000646 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR DAS HEATHER CONLEY AND EUR/NCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EU, SI 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: NEW CENTER FOR EU INTEGRATION ANNOUNCED 
 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified.  Please protect accordingly. 
 
1.  (U) SUMMARY:  On 08 July, GOS announced its intention to 
create a new center to assist EU aspirants, in particular 
Western Balkan hopefuls.  Although it is still in the early 
stages of development, the European Commission and the World 
Bank have already expressed an interest in the project.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
A NEW CENTER FOR EU INTEGRATION IS ANNOUNCED 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
2.  (U) On 08 July, the GOS announced its plans to create a 
new center to assist EU aspirants, in particular countries 
of the Western Balkans.  Minister without Portfolio for 
European Affairs Milan Cvikl stated that Slovenia wants to 
help the countries of SE Europe by sharing \"knowledge, 
experience, and practical advice.\"  Cvikl\'s Government 
Office of European Affairs (SVEZ) has been commissioned to 
provide 5 million SIT (approx. 25,000 USD) as start-up 
capital and to draft a budget proposal for 2005.  After SVEZ 
drafts the Act of Establishment, presumably in July or early 
August, the GOS plans to hold an international ministerial 
conference on 17 September to examine the needs of the 
beneficiaries and the willingness of donors to provide 
funding.  Cvikl has already discussed the initiative with 
his counterparts from SE Europe and the EU, and he plans to 
present it to the Ambassadors of EU states in Slovenia. 
 
 
RATIONALE FOR THE CENTER 
------------------------- 
 
3.  (U) According to GoS statements to the press, the center 
will have several key objectives: to serve as an 
intermediary for the transfer of experience and practical 
advice among member states and EU aspirants; to offer 
assistance by seeking synergies with programs that the EU 
already offers; and potentially to identify the needs for 
other forms of assistance not currently available.  Since 
the center is still in the planning phases, the specifics on 
how these goals will be accomplished have yet to be hammered 
out.  However, Slovenia does plan to bring representatives 
from other EU countries and from international organizations 
into the project. 
 
SLOVENIA\'S CENTRAL ROLE IN THE WESTERN BALKANS 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
4.  (U) Cvikl told the press that it is perfectly 
understandable that such a center be set up in Slovenia, as 
\"we have our own experience with EU integration, we adjusted 
the legal system, conducted internal reforms and 
transitions, and obtained experience that potential 
candidates must gain.\"  In addition, Cvikl asserted that 
Slovenia knows and understands the region better than any 
other EU member, as it shares a common history with the 
Western Balkans. \"Everyone sees Slovenia as a bridge to the 
countries of SE Europe, which can contribute to make the 
prospects of EU entry a reality for these countries in the 
medium term,\" Cvikl told the press. 
 
 
THE CENTER\'S FUNDING 
-------------------- 
 
5.  (SBU) The GoS stated for the press that the 
international community had met the idea for the 
establishment of the center with interest.  Therefore, the 
GoS hopes that the center will be funded with donations made 
by other EU members as well as relevant international 
institutions.  Cvikl\'s Chief of Staff Zivana Mejac told FSN 
Econ Specialist that the EU Commission, specifically the 
Directorate of Enlargement, and the World Bank have already 
expressed interest in the project.  The budget has yet to be 
determined. 
 
6.  (SBU) COMMENT: Post believes the creation of the center 
was most likely the work of the former Minister without 
Portfolio and new Slovenian EU Commissioner Janez Potocnik, 
who may have aspirations to replace current EU Commissioner 
for Enlargement Gunther Verheugen.  Slovenia has a strong 
interest in the region because of its proximity, and because 
it is the largest investor in the region.  After failures in 
the region, the Balkan question is a delicate one for the 
EU.  The EU most likely sees Slovenia as an intermediary for 
working on issues in the region, while Slovenia would likely 
view this new center as a mechanism for increasing the 
country\'s weight in Brussels and for making stronger 
economic and political inroads in the Balkans.  While the 
new center is ostensibly conceptualized to assist any EU 
 
aspirant countries, in reality it will most likely be geared 
toward the former Yugoslav republics.  END COMMENT 
 
YOUNG 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"18626","7/13/2004 3:39","04LJUBLJANA653","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04LJUBLJANA539","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 000653 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, SI 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: NATIONAL ELECTIONS CALLED FOR 03 OCTOBER 
 
REF: A. LJUBLJANA 539 
 
     B. LJUBLJANA 547 
     C. LJUBLJANA 636 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified.  Please protect accordingly. 
 
1.  (U) SUMMARY: Slovenian President Janez Drnovsek has 
called for National Assembly elections to be held on 03 
October.  Although the official electoral campaign starts on 
03 September, the deadline for registering official 
candidate lists is 08 September.  END SUMMARY 
 
CHOOSING THE DATE FOR THE ELECTION 
----------------------------------- 
 
2.  (U) Slovenian President Janez Drnovsek announced on 09 
July that National Assembly elections will be held on 03 
October.  The Law on Parliamentary Elections stipulates that 
the President of the Republic must call elections between 75 
and 135 days before the \"expiration of four years since the 
first session of the previous parliament.\"  The Law also 
dictates that the elections must take place no more than two 
months, and no less than 15 days, before the date the 
previously elected National Assembly had its first session. 
Given these limitations, elections had to be scheduled 
between 29 August and 10 October. 
 
ELECTION CAMPAIGNING 
--------------------- 
 
3.  (U) According to law, campaigning for the National 
Assembly elections may not begin until one month prior to 
the election.  Therefore, campaigning will officially begin 
on 03 September. 
 
HOW THE DEPUTIES ARE ELECTED 
----------------------------- 
 
4.  (U) Elections to the Slovenian National Assembly operate 
on a proportional system.  The voters, divided 
geographically into eight electoral units, elect eleven 
deputies in each unit.  Additionally, the Hungarian and the 
Italian minorities each elect one representative for a total 
of 90 deputies.  A party must pass a four percent threshold 
nationally in order to get any seats in the National 
Assembly. 
 
5.  (U) Slovenian voters are offered party lists with the 
candidates from their geographic unit.  If a party passes 
the four percent threshold, the number of deputies it will 
send to the National Assembly from its list will be based on 
what percentage of the vote the party received.  [NOTE: 
While preferential voting, i.e. the ability of voters to 
choose a specific candidate on a party\'s list, did not occur 
in 2000, it did take place in the recent European 
Parliamentary elections (ref A and B).  It is not yet 
certain if preferential voting will occur in the 03 October 
parliamentary elections.  END NOTE.] 
 
COMMENT 
-------- 
 
6.  (SBU) In the 2000 elections, eight parties surpassed the 
minimum four percent threshold to obtain seats in the 
National Assembly.  Pundits believe that a similar number of 
parties are expected to take seats in the fall elections, 
albeit not necessarily the same parties that are currently 
represented.  We note, of course, that public opinion polls 
in Slovenia - especially those coordinated by the left-of- 
center media - have been less than reliable in the recent 
past and particularly in the lead up to the European 
Parliamentary elections.  Although it is too early to 
predict how specific parties will perform, many observers 
are skeptical of the Liberal Democratic Party\'s (LDS) 
ability to repeat its election 2000 success when it won the 
support of 36 percent of voters.  Indeed, if European 
Parliamentary elections are any indication (ref B), the 
ruling center-left coalition will be faced with a vigorous 
challenge from the center-right opposition parties.  Despite 
the ban on pre-September 3 electioneering, battle lines are 
already being drawn.  The drama surrounding former FoMin 
Rupel and the Assembly for the Republic (ref C) is evidence 
of this, as are recent public statements by the avowedly 
apolitical (but looking very political) former President 
Kucan from his perch atop Forum 21.  END COMMENT 
 
YOUNG 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"18648","7/13/2004 12:43","04LJUBLJANA660","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 000660 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE AND DRL/IRF - MARYLAND AND KUCHTA-HELBLING 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, KIRF, SI 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: MOSQUE REFERENDUM DECLARED 
UNCONSTITUTIONAL 
 
 
REF: LJUBLJANA 603 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified.  Please protect accordingly. 
 
1.  (U) SUMMARY.  In a 7-1 decision, the Slovenian 
Constitutional Court rejected a proposed referendum on the 
construction of a mosque in Ljubljana.  The Court declared 
that the referendum violated the right to freedom of 
religion set out in Article 41 of the Slovenian 
Constitution.  The Islamic Community will now to start to 
raise funds to buy the state-owned property and be able to 
build the mosque on the piece of land the city has zoned for 
this purpose.  END SUMMARY. 
 
THE DECISION 
------------- 
 
2.  (U) In a 7-1 decision, the Slovenian Constitutional 
Court rejected a proposed referendum on the construction of 
a mosque in Ljubljana.  Although, on its face, the 
referendum challenged just the spatial plan of the mosque in 
light of local zoning laws, the Court opined that the 
referendum and the campaign surrounding it were, indeed, 
about the rejection of the mosque on religious grounds.  As 
a result, the Court declared that the referendum violated 
the right to freedom of religion set out in Article 41 of 
the Slovenian Constitution. 
 
 
POSITIVE REACTIONS 
------------------- 
 
3.  (U) Ljubljana Mayor Danica Simsic of the United List of 
Social Democrats (ZLSD), who joined the Islamic community in 
filing a petition with the Court challenging the referendum, 
told the press that she was \"pleased with the ruling.\"  She 
also said that the broadly worded decision meant that any 
referendum on the constitutionally guaranteed human rights 
of a religious minority would be unconstitutional.  She 
hoped that the controversy surrounding the referendum would 
be \"the last hurdle on the path to the construction of a 
mosque in Ljubljana.\" 
 
4.  (U) The Mufti of the Slovenian Islamic community, Osman 
Djogic, issued a statement calling the Court\'s decision \"a 
confirmation that the rule of law exists in Slovenia.\"  He 
promised to keep the public informed about developments in 
the construction process.  Djogic told the press that the 
Islamic community would start collecting funds immediately 
to buy the state-owned land where the mosque is to be built. 
 
NEGATIVE REACTIONS 
------------------- 
 
5.  (U) Mihael Jarc, a member of the List for Potable Water, 
a Ljubljana City Councilor and initiator of the referendum, 
stated his \"surprise\" at the decision and called it a 
\"stain\" on the Court.  NOTE: He is the only Council member 
from this environmental, nationalistic party.  END NOTE. 
Jerc told the press that, although he disagreed with the 
ruling, he would respect it. 
6.  (U) Ljubljana City Councilor Peter Susnik, a member of 
the Slovenian Democratic Party (SDS), stated for the media 
that he was surprised by the decision.  He had supported the 
referendum and said that he expected the Constitutional 
Court to side with his position.  He predicted, without 
elaborating, that the Court\'s decision would \"have long term 
consequences.\" 
 
BACKGROUND 
----------- 
 
7.  (U) At the beginning of 2003, Ljubljana Mayor Danica 
Simsic expressed support for the mosque and its proposed 
location.  The Ljubljana Department for Urbanism obtained 
permission from the Agency for the Environment in August 
2003 to change zoning laws to allow construction of the 
mosque.  In December 2003, City Councilor Mihael Jarc 
started an initiative for a referendum on the change of the 
zoning regulation and gathered the requisite 11,000 
signatures.  On 18 April, the City Council voted to support 
the referendum and set 23 May for voting that, due to a 
Court injunction, never took place.  On 28 June, the City 
Council reversed its position and endorsed Simsic\'s effort 
to have the constitutionality of the referendum decided by 
the Court (reftel). 
 
COMMENT 
-------- 
 
8.  (SBU) The Constitutional Court\'s decision was much more 
sweeping that some had predicted it would be.  The 
referendum had been worded so that the public would only 
vote on the spatial plan of the mosque and not on the idea 
of the mosque.  However, the Court\'s decision swept aside 
this technicality and saw the referendum as an attempt to 
curb the constitutionally guaranteed right of religious 
freedom.  With the Court\'s broad decision, mosque opponents 
will now have a much more difficult time attempting to halt 
construction. 
 
9.  (SBU) Simsic has been playing an important and 
impressive role in safeguarding minority rights in the city. 
She originally went against the wishes of the City Council 
by opposing the referendum on the mosque.  Later, we believe 
she exerted her influence to have the majority of the 
Council change its official position to side with her.  As 
made obvious by her comments to the press, her wish is to 
guarantee religious freedom and human rights for all 
residents of Ljubljana.  As long as she remains mayor, we 
are confident she will continue to promote these values and, 
thereby, ensure the ultimate construction of a mosque.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
 
YOUNG 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"19279","7/30/2004 10:35","04LJUBLJANA726","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04LJUBLJANA90","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 000726 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR EUR/NCE, EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINR, EU, SI 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: GoS APPROVES POTOCNIK\'S EU COMMISSIONER 
NOMINATION 
REF: A. LJUBLJANA 90 
 
B. (03) LJUBLJANA 1251 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified.  Please protect accordingly. 
 
1.  (SBU) SUMMARY.  On 29 July, the GoS approved Janez 
Potocnik\'s nomination to serve as Slovenia\'s Commissioner 
in the EU.  Potocnik has had great experience within the 
EU, having served as Slovenia\'s top accession negotiator 
and interim Commissioner.  He is independent and can be 
considered a friend of the USG. END SUMMARY. 
 
POTOCNIK\'S APPOINTMENT APPROVED 
-------------------------------- 
2.  (U) On 29 July, the GoS approved Janez Potocnik\'s 
nomination to serve as Slovenia\'s Commissioner in the EU. 
Since Parliament recently approved Potocnik as Interim 
Commissioner for the period of Slovenia\'s 01 May accession 
until 01 November, GoS stated that there would be no need 
for another confirmation vote. 
 
POTOCNIK\'S PRIORITIES AND INDEPENDENCE 
--------------------------------------- 
 
3. (U) When speaking to the press after the GoS nominated 
him, Potocnik stated he would do his work on the Commission 
in an \"open, consistent, and independent way.\"  He 
elaborated by saying that although coming from Slovenia 
\"will undoubtedly affect my thoughts and actions ... I will 
be responsible for broader European interests, which will 
have advantage over national or regional ones.\"  He did not 
state what Commissioner slot he wanted, although the GoS 
has stated its desire for either the Enlargement, Regional 
Development, or Budget posts.  Potocnik stated for the 
press that his biggest objectives would be to ensure the 
success of EU enlargement and to bring the Commission and 
its work \"closer to its citizens.\" 
 
OPPOSITION AGAINST POTOCNIK 
---------------------------- 
 
4.  (U) The opposition parties in the National Assembly 
approved of Potocnik when he was put forward as interim 
Commissioner after EU accession.  During the European 
Parliamentary election campaign in June, however, Potocnik 
appeared at a rally for the governing coalition Liberal 
Democrats (LDS).  Although Potocnik has publicly stated 
that he is not a member of LDS and will remain strongly 
independent, the opposition Social Democrats (SDS) has 
challenged his nomination this time around.  SDS\' main 
criticism is that LDS has been making long term 
appointments while ignoring the traditional Slovenian 
method of consensus building for important decisions, and 
Potocnik\'s appointment is the highest profile example.  SDS 
Party leader Janez Jansa stated that making such 
appointments are \"an assault on taxpayers\" that could top 
100 million SIT (approx 500,000 USD) if those appointed are 
removed from office. [NOTE: If someone is removed from an 
appointed post, he is still entitled to the full salary 
until he gets a new job with comparable pay.  END NOTE.] 
The opposition Slovenian People\'s Party (SLS) has echoed 
SDS\' criticisms, while the opposition National Party (SNS), 
an extreme right wing party, has taken its criticism of 
Potocnik in a different direction.  SNS has criticized 
Potocnik\'s public support of Croatia\'s accession to the EU. 
 
POTOCNIK\'S BIOGRAPHY 
--------------------- 
 
5.  (SBU) Janez Potocnik, born in 1958, headed the 
Slovenian Negotiation Team for Accession from 1998 until 
accession, and directed the Government Office for European 
Affairs for six months in 2000.  In January 2002, he was 
appointed Minister without Portfolio for European Affairs, 
a post he relinquished upon becoming Slovenia\'s EU 
Commissioner after the 01 May accession.  Potocnik\'s 
background is in economics, an area in which he holds a PhD 
from the University of Ljubljana.  He was a member of the 
task force charged with bringing Slovenian economic and 
agricultural policies in line with EU norms, and also 
headed the Institute of Macroeconomic Development of the 
Republic of Slovenia from 1994 until 2001.  Potocnik 
participated in the Voluntary Visitor Program in January 
2004, and was very enthusiastic about the program (ref: A 
and B). 
 
COMMENT 
-------- 
 
6.  (SBU) The fact that no opposition parties objected to 
Potocnik\'s nomination earlier this year as interim 
Commissioner lends credence to the idea that current 
objections can be attributed to electioneering ahead of the 
03 October national elections.  SDS seems to be using 
Potocnik\'s single appearance at an LDS rally as a ploy to 
get into the news and to highlight its differences with 
LDS.  Potocnik is one of the main targets of SDS, but they 
have also criticized LDS for making other long-term 
appointments without first finding consensus.  Post 
believes that SNS and SLS are also using Potocnik\'s 
appointment to highlight their differences with LDS. 
Despite opposition statements to the contrary, Post 
believes that Potocnik remains stoutly independent, and his 
comments to the press have strengthened this view. 
 
7.  (SBU) Potocnik does not have a voting record on Trans- 
Atlantic relations, but from our meetings and dealings with 
him, Post characterizes him as a pragmatist and a genuine 
friend of the US.  He supports Turkey\'s accession to the 
EU, and he is someone we could call up and ask for help 
from within the EU context.   Post believes that US 
interlocutors will find him articulate, rational, 
intelligent and friendly. END COMMENT. 
 
YOUNG 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"19849","8/18/2004 4:53","04LJUBLJANA773","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04LJUBLJANA726","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS LJUBLJANA 000773 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE, EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, TSPL, SI 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA\'S EC PORTFOLIO COMPLEMENTS NATIONAL 
STRATEGY 
 
REF: LJUBLJANA 726 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified, please treat accordingly. 
 
1. (U)  By all accounts the European Commission Science and 
Research portfolio assigned to  Slovene Commissioner Janez 
Potocnik is a positive development for Slovenia. Both the 
ruling coalition and opposition parties view this portfolio, 
as opposed to the EU Enlargement portfolio many expected for 
Potocnik, as more in line with Slovenia\'s natiional strategy 
for growth and development. The Government of Slovenia 
believes that Potocnik\'s assignment at the EC will contribute 
to Slovenia\'s own development as a scienctific research and 
technology center.  While expanding the European Union south 
and east through the Balkans remains a top priority, Slovenia 
views Barroso\'s entrusting Potocnik with this portfolio as 
confirmation that Slovenia, though small, has signifcant and 
varied contributions to make to Europe. 
 
2.(SBU)  Comment:  While there was a great deal of 
speculation and really expectation that Slovenia\'s 
commissioner would receive the enlargement portfolio, 
Slovenia may now find it somewhat easier to deal firmly with 
Croatia on border issues.   It will be much easier to avoid 
the appearance of trying to leverage its role in expansion to 
gain advantage in the dispute with Croatia.  End Comment 
YOUNG 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"20282","9/2/2004 2:59","04LJUBLJANA818","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS LJUBLJANA 000818 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT. FOR EUR/NCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, ELAB, PINR, PGOV, SI, GTIP 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA COM\'S FAREWELL CALL ON MINISTER OF LABOR 
 
 
Sensitive But Unclassified.  Please protect accordingly 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  Ambassador paid a farewell call on 
Minister of Labor, Family and Social Affairs, Vlado Dimovski 
on August 30.  Dimovski, who will not run for a seat in 
Parliament and does not plan to remain in government after 
elections, was openly critical of the last two years of 
leadership under Prime Minister Anton Rop, and he repeatedly 
mentioned the need for Slovenia to become more \"open\" and 
\"modern.\"  Dimovski was rightly proud of his accomplishments 
while in office, but his frustration with the over-all pace 
of reform in Slovenia was evident throughout the meeting. 
End Summary. 
 
Significant Accomplishments 
--------------------------- 
 
2. (U)  As Dimovski explained to the Ambassador, it took him 
three days before he actually got to his office after his 
appointment as Labor Minister 4 years ago.  Dimovski\'s was a 
baptism by fire where he went directly from his confirmation 
to the negotiating table with Slovene labor unions.  In the 
succeeding years, Dimovski was dedicated to preparing the 
Slovene work-force for entry into the EU.  Slovenia\'s score 
for flexibility in the work-force went from 26 to 12 
according the World Bank.  He attributes his success on that 
front and with the reform of the pension system on the 
go-slow approach Slovenia has employed for reforms across the 
board since independence 12 years ago. \"Changes that are too 
fast are like a boomerang.  It is really an art to make 
changes in Slovenia.\" 
 
 
Political Reform Must Match Other Reforms 
----------------------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU)  Despite his advocacy of the go-slow approach on 
labor and pension reform, Dimovski was clearly frustrated by 
the lack of political reform in Slovenia.  He feels the last 
ten years of transition have been merely a reallocation of 
wealth, and that now is the time to get serious about 
creating new wealth.  In particular, Dimovski found 
unacceptable the continued high-level of involvement by the 
ruling political parties in companies and entities that 
should be privatized or at least run independently.  He 
mentioned specifically the KAD and SOD, two government run 
investment funds, which were given a 25-30 percent stake in 
every Slovene company as they were privatized.  Responding to 
the Ambassador\'s comment that powerful forces had a vested 
interest in the status quo, Dimovski predicted an 
institutional crisis by 2006/7 if nothing changed.  One hope, 
he said, is that this is not acceptable behavior in the EU 
and this could be the catalyst for change. 
 
 
Good Cooperation with DOL on Pension Reform 
------------------------------------------- 
 
4. (U) Dimovski was particularly pleased with U.S. Dept. of 
Labor assistance on the reform of the pension system.  He 
claimed, and we can confirm, the formerly struggling pension 
systems are now major players in the Slovenian capital 
market.  They have breathed some life into the Slovenian 
stock exchange.  Dimovski\'s concern now is that the pensions 
funds can (and do) move markets, they be properly regulated. 
(Note: the Ambassador explained that this type of regulation 
is in the purview of the Securities and Exchange Commission 
in the US and that we would convey Slovenia\'s interest in any 
available programs.  End Note.) 
 
Trafficking in Persons 
---------------------- 
 
5. (U)  In closing, the Ambassador thanked Dimovski for his 
Ministry\'s role in promoting Trafficking in Persons 
legislation to which Dimovski replied that it was topic that 
need continuing visibility and exposure.  His hope is that 
the agreement his ministry will sign to fund Kljuc, an NGO 
involved in trafficking issues, will aid in this effort. 
YOUNG 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"20293","9/2/2004 8:12","04LJUBLJANA823","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 000823 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, SI 
SUBJECT:  TV SLOVENIJA AIRS FIRST UNOFFICIAL DEBATE BETWEEN 
PM ROP AND OPPOSITION LEADER JANSA 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified -- Please Protect Accordingly 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY:  On 30 August, TV Slovenija broadcast a long- 
planned confrontation between PM Anton Rop and opposition 
leader and Slovene Democratic Party [SDS] President Janez 
Jansa.  The two leaders introduced different \"diagnoses\" of 
Slovenia\'s success in the last four years.  Jansa was very 
critical of Slovenia\'s slow development in the fields of 
economy and social security.  He said the government did not 
fulfill several promises, especially on privatization and 
health care reform.  Jansa did, however, mention some 
successful initiatives, highlighting foreign and defense 
policy and e-government initiatives in the areas of taxation 
and the judicial system.  As expected, Rop refuted all 
criticism and claimed the government had fulfilled its major 
goals.  He highlighted economic growth that was 1.5 to 2 
percent higher than the EU average.  One characteristic 
shared by both politicians during the broadcast was an 
unwillingness to answer concrete questions raised by the 
moderator.  END SUMMARY. 
 
JANSA 
----- 
 
2.  (U) Jansa began his assessment of the past four years by 
focusing on positive accomplishments of the current 
government, mentioning foreign policy successes and the 
termination of conscription into the Slovenian Armed Forces 
(SAF).  He said these were issues where the government 
\"listened to our [Opposition Coalition] proposals\".  He also 
mentioned computerized income tax collection and introduction 
of a computerized land register as steps forward. 
 
3.  (U) As criticism, Jansa mentioned Slovenia\'s slow 
economic development and delays in privatization that will 
prevent the country from catching up with the most developed 
countries of the EU within the next ten years.  Jansa said 
the country\'s unfulfilled goals could be achieved more 
quickly if political changes occur.  In the field of foreign 
policy, Jansa only criticized Slovenia\'s policy towards 
Croatia, calling for a more active engagement.  In this 
regard he echoed a proposal by the right-leaning political 
forum Assembly for the Republic (AFTR) on creating a joint 
Slovene - Croatian commission to deal with border issues.  On 
a more global scale, Jansa suggested that tensions between 
the U.S. and Europe are abating, obviating the need for 
Slovenia to take sides between the so-called \"New Europe\" and 
\"Old Europe.\"  He said that Slovenia should follow the lead 
within the EU of countries like Portugal or Luxembourg, both 
of which he says are influential, despite their small size. 
 
ROP 
--- 
 
4.  (U) Rop refuted all criticisms levied against his 
Government and said that he is very optimistic about 
Slovenia\'s future development.  Regarding the past four 
years, he said Slovenian citizens can be proud of results 
that represent accomplishments of more than just one 
government or a single political party.  Concerning economic 
growth, he noted that Slovenia had reached its goal of 
exceeding the EU average by 1.5 to 2 percent.  Rop argued 
that the GoS policy toward Croatia is, indeed, active and he 
mentioned Slovenia\'s reliance on its new membership in the EU 
to block Croatia\'s proclamation of an ecological - fishing 
zone that would inure to Slovenia\'s detriment.  He also 
mentioned positive movement in handling high profile issues 
surrounding Ljubljanska Banka and Yugoslav succession. 
 
UNANSWERED QUESTIONS 
-------------------- 
 
5.  (U) Both Rop and Jansa dodged certain questions posed by 
the moderator.  Rop refused to highlight a single mistake of 
the Government under his leadership.  He just said, 
generally, that certain matters could have been carried out 
faster and differently.  Jansa on the other hand did not 
answer a question directly about whether a coalition between 
SDS or the opposition Coalition Slovenija (which includes the 
center-right Nova Slovenija (NSi)) and Rop\'s LDS would be 
possible.  Jansa said that it is good for any country or 
party not to hold power continuously.  Rop responded that LDS 
would not exclude any particular party in advance of election 
results. 
 
ELECTION PREDICTIONS 
 
 
-------------------- 
 
6. (U) When asked to predict the results of the October 3 
national parliamentary election, Jansa said that SDS will be 
the strongest party and that - together with NSi - it will 
replicate the results of the European Parliament election. 
SDS and NSi won four seats in the European Parliament, while 
LDS and its left-wing coalition partner United List of Social 
Democrats (ZLSD) won only three.  Jansa said he would resign 
as SDS President if his party does not improve its results 
from the 2000 elections.  Rop said simply that he expects an 
LDS victory and that any other result would be a fiasco. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
7.  (U) This televised debate was seen by many Slovenes as 
the start of an election campaign season that commences 
officially on 3 September.  Jansa\'s criticisms came directly 
from the agenda developed by his \"shadow cabinet\" for 
Slovenia\'s future.  The parliamentary interpellation motion 
launched by the Opposition Coalition against Rop\'s government 
started August 31.  The interpellation motion is widely seen 
as a pre-election tool that Jansa hopes to use to his 
political advantage. 
 
8.  (SBU) Slovene voters are traditionally seen as tending to 
vote \"against\" what they oppose, rather than \"in favor\" of 
what they like.  In the past, Jansa has performed well in 
election years but has lost support in the immediate lead-up 
to election day because of his inability to consolidate the 
parties on the right.  Jansa\'s chances to become PM will 
increase if he can effect such a consolidation to counter an 
LDS that is likely to remain the strongest party in Slovenia. 
On the other hand, the big challenge for the LDS will be to 
increase voter turnout.  Even that might not be enough for 
Rop this time, though, if the parties on the right can unify 
before the election.  END COMMENT. 
 
YOUNG 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"20332","9/3/2004 4:00","04LJUBLJANA830","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 000830 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/PPD, EUR/NCE AND INR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO, PGOV, PINR, SI 
SUBJECT:  BIAS IN SLOVENE OPINION POLLING:  MORE ABOUT 
AFFORDABILITY THAN POLITICS? 
 
 
Sensitive but unclassified -- protect accordingly 
 
1.  (SBU) SUMMARY.  As in most countries, the results 
of public opinion polls in Slovenia are widely 
discussed among media, politicians, pundits and the 
public.  However, few of these \"consumers\" are aware of 
the methodologies that are used or the ease with which 
polling data can be manipulated.  Although 
misrepresentation of polling data exists in virtually 
every country, the close relationships between polling 
centers, media outlets, and political parties in 
Slovenia make it incumbent on the consumer of opinion 
polls to study their methodologies closely and take all 
results with a grain of salt.  In an analysis of 
polling methodologies used by different survey research 
centers in Slovenia, we have determined that 
professional pollsters are highly knowledgeable and 
cognizant of potential biases inherent in their polling 
methods.  However, lack of sufficient funding in a 
small country often means that polls are done on the 
cheap and that many of the results contain considerable 
bias.  More difficult to determine is whether bias is 
ignored intentionally and whether political parties can 
\"commission bias\" when paying for a poll.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (U) In late August, Post\'s Public Diplomacy Officer 
(who has a PhD in Political Science and a Master\'s- 
level certificate in Survey Research Analysis) 
conducted a series of interviews with researchers at 
three major polling centers in Slovenia:  the Research 
Center for Public Opinion and Mass Communication at the 
University of Ljubljana; the DELO STIK polling agency 
affiliated with the leading Slovenian daily \"Delo\"; and 
the NINA MEDIA polling agency affiliated with the daily 
\"Dnevnik.\"  The following observations and comments are 
based on the interviews mentioned above and an analysis 
of the methodologies used by these polling centers. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
Sample Bias vs. Sampling Error: A crucial distinction 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
3.  (U) One of the main problems with public opinion 
polls in Slovenia and one of the main causes of faulty 
analysis by the media lies with the fact that polling 
agencies often do not take adequate care to ensure that 
various biases are eliminated from their polling 
methodologies.  Every opinion poll contains some bias 
and reducing bias to a minimum often comes at a great 
cost.  Thus, every polling agency faces a tradeoff 
between bias and the cost of utilizing expensive 
procedures to minimize it.  Since most polling agencies 
are businesses looking to make a profit, cost-cutting 
is prevalent; nevertheless, lower costs often mean less 
accuracy. 
 
4.  (U) Another major problem is that the media, who 
are the primary consumers and interpreters of opinion 
polls, often do not adequately understand the 
distinction between sample bias and sampling error. 
Opinion polls that have considerable bias but that have 
minimal error are often presented to the public as if 
they were quite accurate.  Typically, for example, a 
media outlet will report that an opinion poll has a 
margin of error of plus or minus 2-5 percent.  What 
they do not say, however, is that in addition to this 
margin of error (known as \"sampling error\"), these 
polls also--in fact invariably--contain sample bias, 
which can often skew a given poll by as much as 10, 15, 
or even 25 percent.  A recent conversation with the 
news director of a major Slovenian television station 
revealed a complete failure to appreciate this crucial 
distinction. 
 
5.  (U) Sampling error is a measure of the likelihood 
that a perfectly random sample of the population will 
have the same characteristics as the population as a 
whole.  Sampling error can be measured using a 
statistical formula.  Sample bias, however, cannot be 
measured.  Sample bias occurs when a polling agency 
consistently fails to obtain perfectly random samples 
of the population (often for a multitude of different 
reasons).  For example, if a polling agency were to 
interview people only within a 50-mile radius of their 
headquarters, they would consistently fail to obtain a 
perfectly random sample of the population.  However, 
extensive polling within this 50-mile radius could very 
 
 
well reduce the margin of error to plus or minus 2 
percent, or even less. 
 
6.  (U) Sample bias is almost impossible to eliminate. 
Seemingly innocuous methodologies like phoning random 
numbers to conduct surveys can produce remarkably 
biased results.  For example, poorer households tend 
not to own telephones (or subscribe to fewer lines), so 
phone interviews consistently bias the sample in favor 
of wealthier respondents, who in turn often have 
different voting preferences.  On the other hand, if 
telephone polls are conducted during the day, they may 
consistently exclude working professionals (since they 
are less likely to answer their home phone) and thus 
overstate the views of the elderly, students, and the 
unemployed.  While telephone penetration rates in 
Slovenia are estimated at 94 percent, and while most of 
the centers poll from 3:00-9:00 PM, the prevalence of 
telephone bias still exists and impacts polling 
results.  This is true especially since \"busier\" 
members of household are less likely to answer the 
phone while those who have more free time are likelier 
to agree to participate in a survey. 
 
7.  (SBU) Polling agency directors were of course 
cognizant of such methodological flaws, but noted that 
telephone polls were cheaper than fieldwork and 
indicated that the exorbitant costs of fieldwork often 
prevented them from doing more methodologically 
rigorous polling.  Polling on the cheap, they argued, 
was better than no polling at all.  While it is true 
that some media in the U.S. regularly conduct 
methodologically substandard polls, these polls are 
usually discounted by polling professionals, who rely 
on the far more accurate analyses provided by academic 
institutions, major media outlets, and reputed polling 
organizations like Gallup, who have the financial means 
to conduct methodologically rigorous surveys.  In 
Slovenia, the small number of polling centers and the 
modest funding they receive means that few polls employ 
a rigorous methodology. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Weighted Samples and Representative Regions 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
8.  (U) One standard method for reducing bias involves 
the \"weighting\" of survey samples.  This involves 
factoring into the analysis the known differences 
between the sample and the population as a whole 
(usually determined from a census).  For example, if 
you randomly telephone ten people and the result is 
that 3 women and 7 men answer the phone, and yet you 
know the population is split evenly between men and 
women, then to weight the sample you would simply 
multiply the responses of the women by 7/10 and the 
responses of the men by 3/10.  The problem with this 
method, however, is that while it may be easy to weight 
responses by gender or area of residence, there are 
hundreds of other variables that simply cannot be 
weighted because their underlying values are unknown 
(e.g. religiosity, previous affiliation with the 
Communist Party, etc).  Most Slovenian research centers 
weight their samples by gender, education, and region 
of residence.  However, other variables like affluence, 
church attendance, and previous support for the 
Communist regime have all been shown to have a 
significant--and perhaps even greater--impact on 
political preferences than the variables currently in 
use. 
 
9.  (U) Another method for minimizing bias is to pick a 
representative region based on prior election results. 
This is sometimes called the \"Peoria method.\"  If a 
particular region or municipality within a country had 
election results that perfectly mirrored the national 
averages, then polling agencies will sometimes conduct 
methodologically rigorous polls within those regions in 
order to predict future election results.  The problem 
with this method, however, is that populations shift 
and what may be a representative region during one 
election cycle may no longer be representative during a 
subsequent cycle.  This is especially true if a new set 
of issues is being raised from one election to the 
next. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
 
 
Slovenia\'s EP elections: What Went Wrong 
----------------------------------------- 
 
10.  (SBU) The failure of most Slovenian polling 
agencies to adequately predict the European 
Parliamentary elections is mainly due to various 
different types of sample bias.  While it is impossible 
to authoritatively determine why such bias occurred, 
one hypothesis that seems likely is that the winner of 
the EP elections--Nova Slovenija (NSi or New Slovenia)- 
-has a rather \"unrepresentative\" electorate.  To cite 
but one example, NSi attracts both less educated voters 
and highly educated voters.  So, if a polling agency 
samples a population and weights the sample by 
education, they may actually be missing the two 
extremes--the uneducated and the highly educated--and 
hence the result may under-represent the percentage of 
voters who would vote for NSi. 
 
11.  (SBU) Anecdotal evidence from field polls 
conducted by DELO STIK also indicates that New 
Slovenia\'s voters tend to be more fearful of the 
government (a relic of the Communist system), and hence 
less likely to answer public opinion polls out of fear 
that the government may be trying to keep tabs on them. 
If such suspicions really do exist, they could 
potentially result in a large understatement of the 
number of NSi voters within a given region.  This sort 
of bias is also more likely in a telephone poll than in 
a field survey. 
 
12.  (SBU) The inability of Slovenian polling agencies 
to adequately predict the turnout for the EP elections 
also reflects a different type of bias, one associated 
with the way the survey questions are phrased and 
perceived by respondents.  It is conventional wisdom 
that when asking respondents if they plan to vote in an 
election, 10-15 percent more respondents will claim 
they intend to vote than actually do.  Such \"social 
desirability bias\" (as it is commonly known) stems from 
their desire to appear as conscientious citizens.  A 
poll conducted by the Center for Public Opinion and 
Mass Communication indicated that even after the 
election was over, 12 percent more respondents 
indicated that they had voted than actually did.  While 
polling center researchers were well aware of this bias 
and generally predicted the low turnout in the EP 
elections rather accurately, the media seemed more 
surprised that so many fewer voters would show up than 
had claimed they would vote. 
 
13.  (SBU) A final reason for the poor polling results 
in the run-up to the EP elections also has to do with 
the problem of low voter turnout.  Many of the polling 
center directors we spoke with claimed that NSi voters 
were underrepresented in the pre-election voting 
because they are much more disciplined than the 
electorates of other parties (meaning that they are 
more likely to show up on election day--rain or shine). 
Since this is a quality that is difficult if not 
impossible to measure prior to election day itself, the 
pre-election polls generally overrepresented the other 
electorates and underrepresented NSi. 
 
-------------------------- 
The Tail Wagging the Dog? 
-------------------------- 
 
14.  (SBU) The bias inherent within different polling 
methodologies and its effect on the popularity of 
political parties is not unknown to polling agencies. 
Researchers at the Center for Public Opinion and Mass 
Communication told us that without properly weighting a 
sample for education, the results consistently favor 
right-of-center parties.  From these and other 
comments, we believe that the effects of different 
methodologies are well known to those conducting survey 
data analysis in Slovenia. 
 
15. (SBU) Gossip and conspiracy theories abound in 
Slovene political circles.  Polling results are not 
immune.  The chatter that we hear from our contacts, 
particularly among opposition members, is that polling 
is notoriously unreliable.  The result, they say, is 
that the ruling coalition gets a boost from those who 
want to go with the winner.  According to one source, 
the ruling LDS party commissions their own \"real\" polls 
 
 
for internal use that are cannily accurate, predicting 
the actual July European Parliament election results of 
one party to within half a percentage point. 
 
16.  (SBU) The director of Nina Media also admitted 
that he was personally friendly with many members of 
LDS and that they frequently joked with him about the 
results of his polls.  Although he categorically denied 
that pressure was ever put on him to fudge the results, 
he admitted that most political parties did maintain 
regular contact with his polling agency and that they 
sometimes commissioned their own polls.  He also 
confirmed that most parties are keen to benefit from 
higher polling results.  As he said, \"no one wants to 
look unpopular.\" 
 
-------- 
Comment 
-------- 
 
17.  (SBU) The level of knowledge and expertise among 
professional pollsters in Slovenia is very high. 
However, public opinion polls are extremely easy to 
manipulate by expert pollsters.  Polling agencies that 
compete for contracts have an incentive to maintain a 
reputation for accurate polling, but that does not mean 
that other considerations do not come into play.  In 
Slovenia, polling agencies are generally eager to cut 
costs and conduct polls on the cheap.  Since the more 
accurate methodologies are usually the most expensive-- 
requiring field interviews and persistence in tracking 
down randomly chosen respondents--it is natural for 
agencies to sacrifice accuracy in order to cut costs. 
However, it is also true that if one wanted to bias a 
sample in favor of a particular political constellation- 
-either left-of-center or right-of-center--it would be 
very easy to do so.  In fact, intentional bias of this 
sort could easily be attributed simply to the high cost 
of a more rigorous methodology. 
 
18.  (SBU) While election results generally validate 
the accuracy of a given polling agency, it is not 
impossible for inflated or deflated pre-election polls 
to encourage or dissuade potential voters and thus 
influence the result itself.  Generally, therefore, one 
needs to take all polling results, and claims of 
manipulation, with a grain of salt and be aware of the 
fact that it is always easy to explain inaccuracies 
after an election is over.  Parliamentary elections in 
Slovenia will be held October 3. 
 
HAAS 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"20538","9/13/2004 10:22","04LJUBLJANA854","Embassy Ljubljana","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.



","C O N F I D E N T I A L  LJUBLJANA 000854 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE, EUR/RPM, G/TIP 
USDOC FOR: 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/10/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PINR, SI, GTIP 
SUBJECT: COM\'S FAREWELL CALL ON SLOVENIA\'S PRIME MINISTER, 
ANTON ROP 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Johnny Young for reasons 1.5 (b)(d) 
 
1. (C)  Summary:  The Ambassador paid a final visit to Prime 
Minister Anton (Tone) Rop on September 9.  It was a warm and 
cordial meeting and PM Rop appeared more relaxed and 
congenial than in previous meetings.  Despite terming the 
elections too close to call, Rop exuded an air of confidence 
that he seemed to support with many veiled references to 
polls and public opinion about October 3 elections. Rop 
talked about Slovenia being an \"efficient\" member of the EU 
and \"player in the region\" in NATO.  Iraq was too sensitive 
to discuss prior to elections, but the upcoming Chairmanship 
in Office of the OSCE is a role that Slovenia will 
enthusiastically embrace.  The Ambassador praised Rop for the 
very constructive engagement of Slovenia in some major 
international issues, and it seems, even got him to agree 
that complaints of a major US investor had not been properly 
handled and that his office would bring some pressure to bear 
on the appropriate authorities.  Before the Ambassador left, 
Rop made a strong pitch for a meeting with POTUS next year. 
End Summary. 
 
\"I\'m Optimistic!\" 
---------------- 
 
2.(SBU)  Rop told the Ambassador that if 50 percent of the 
population showed up to the polls, he was confident his 
Liberal Democracy Party (LDS) would come out on top. However, 
he allowed that the vagaries of democracy might overtake as 
they had in the European Parliament elections in Slovenia in 
May (when the center-right opposition parties gained 4 of 7 
seats.)  In the economic realm, Rop saw no substantial 
argument from the opposition because, \"the fact that we 
accepted Europe makes economic policy very fixed.\"  When 
asked about any potential changes in the Ministerial line-up 
post elections, Rop said that he would likely retain the five 
new ministers he appointed earlier this year, but depending 
on how a coalition was formed, some posts could go to other 
parties. 
 
Iraq, the Hot Potato 
-------------------- 
 
3.(SBU) When the Ambassador mentioned that Slovenia should 
participate in the NATO training mission in Iraq, as we 
expected all members would, Rop shook his head and said this 
issue was \"impossible to talk about\" prior to elections.  He 
said Slovenia would continue to participate in police 
training in third countries, but public opinion would not 
support sending Slovene troops into Iraq.  On Afghanistan, 
however, Rop was more forthcoming saying that he believed 
Slovenia should be there to help Karzai and democracy.  Rop 
reiterated Slovenia\'s intention to remain strong players in 
the Balkan region.  Slovenia is planning to have some 230 
troops in Bosnia after the transfer of the SFOR mission to 
the EU. 
 
Slovenia Can Make a Difference 
------------------------------ 
 
4. (C) Rop is looking forward to Slovenia assuming the CiO of 
OSCE.  When offered the services of a US officer in its 
mission either in Vienna or at the MFA in Ljubljana, Rop 
leaned over to his foreign affairs advisor, Iztok Mirosic 
(also Slovenia\'s Ambassador designate to London) and said 
they should take advantage of this. XX recalled that the 
\"real problem was Russia\" and with a big sigh, Rop said they 
were a \"huge problem.\" (Note: Slovenia was made a similar 
offer by the Russians and turned it down, thus they don\'t 
feel they can accept the US offer. End Note.) Slovenia has 
developed some very specialized expertise in the areas of 
de-mining (ITF), psychological treatment for war-affected 
children (Together), and trafficking (Kljuc).  The Ambassador 
encouraged Rop to continue to fund these programs because 
they present a very good image of Slovenia to the world and 
are truly value-added.  Rop mentioned that experts from 
Together were finishing up their work in Jordan (Iraq) and 
would be headed to Beslan, Russia, to help with the aftermath 
of the school hostage debacle.  The Ambassador praised the 
work of Kljuc which was instrumental in maintaining 
Slovenia\'s Tier 2 statust in the Trafficking in Persons 
report.  He told Rop that Slovenia should be working to 
ensure it was in Tier 1 next year. 
 
 
Rop Embraces Wireless Competition? 
--------------------------------- 
 
5. (SBU) The Ambassador raised the issue of Western Wireless 
/Vega (WWI) and expressed real disappointment that there was 
still no resolution on complaints brought by WWI over a year 
ago.  Surprisingly, Rop agreed.  Rop said he was prepared to 
push on the appropriate authorities to try to come to some 
resolution of the case.  Rop seemed to recognize that largely 
state-owned Mobitel\'s position in the wireless market (over 
70 percent share) was not sustainable or defensible within 
the EU, and that the market needed to be opened up. (Note: We 
hope to deliver a letter from Commerce Secretary Evans to PM 
Rop prior to the Ambassasdor\'s departure on 17 September. 
 
Pitch for WH Meeting 
-------------------- 
 
6.(SBU)  In another demonstration of his electoral 
confidence, Rop made a strong pitch for a meeting in 
Washington with the President.  He qualified the request as 
an afterthought, but he clearly believes he\'ll be available 
to meet with the U.S. president at any time that should 
become possible. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7.  (C)  COM found Rop relaxed, open and frank in his 
discussion.  Rop even managed a few smiles, which do not come 
easily to him.  While Iraq is currently a very a sensitive 
subject prior to Slovene elections, Rop did not actually turn 
down future involvement.  It would be worth coming back to 
him on Iraq post elections.  COM would also support a White 
House visit assuming Rop is returned to office and once US 
elections are decided.  It would be a good opportunity to 
express our views to Rop and a chance to extract certain 
commitments from the GOS that we might want.  A White House 
visit would certainly make him more inclined to work closely 
with the USG.  Rop is a man of his word and would honor any 
commitments he made. 
YOUNG 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"20893","9/23/2004 12:29","04LJUBLJANA884","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04LJUBLJANA758","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 000884 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT. FOR EUR/NCE TRIM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PBTS, HR, SI 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: ELECTIONEERING TACTICS CREATE 
INTERNATIONAL INCIDENT 
 
REF: LJUBLJANA 758 
 
1. (U)  Summary:  Slovenia\'s newswires have been alight since 
the arrest and detention of Janez Podobnik, president of the 
right-leaning Slovene Peoples Party (SLS), and 11 other 
members of the party, by Croatian authorities in a disputed 
border region, 22 September.  With elections in just over two 
weeks, no member of ruling left-of-center Liberal Democracy 
Party (LDS) or any other serious parliamentary contender 
could remain silent and allow cooler heads to prevail. Late 
Thursday, the GoS cabinet decided it would withdraw any 
further support for Croatia\'s EU accession.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U)  As Embassy has been able to piece together from news 
and other sources, SLS president Janez Podobnik and  eleven 
of his party members were taken into custody by Croatian 
authorities on Wednesday evening.  According to press 
reports, they had been departing the residence of Josko 
Joras, generally the center of attention on this particular 
border dispute, where they had planted a linden tree.  Joras\' 
property is in an area that is part of the border and 
maritime boundary dispute between Croatia and Slovenia.  He 
has constructed a gravel road from his home to undisputed 
Slovene territory in order to avoid using the Croatian border 
crossing.  It is on this road that Podobnik and others were 
asked for their documents by Croatian authorities. 
Apparently they refused to show ID, claiming they were on 
Slovene territory.  Interestingly, Joras, who is running for 
parliament on the SLS ticket, and who has been arrested 
several times on grounds of similar border violations, was 
not taken into custody this time. 
 
----------- 
ALL SPUN UP 
----------- 
 
3. (U) In order to maintain patriotic credibility among the 
voters, members of all political parties have been compelled 
to make vociferous statements of outrage and dismay over the 
incident, even if better judgment would dictate otherwise. 
Prime Minister Anton Rop has called the incident 
\"unacceptable,\" and \"un-European,\" and he has publicly 
questioned Slovenia\'s ability to support Croatian accession 
to the EU. Rop recalled his Ambassador to Zagreb for 
consultations.  Croatia\'s ambassador, Mario Nobilo, was also 
invited in for a meeting.  Slovenian authorities have been 
ordered to prepare criminal complaints against the Croatian 
police and Rop is also threatening a complaint against the 
government of Croatia.  In addition, opposition parties have 
demanded a special session of parliament to discuss this and 
other border incidents. 
 
4. (U) The Government of Slovenia has also moved to involve 
European authorities in the incident.  Foreign Minister Ivo 
Vajgl, who termed the incident as \"inadmissible,\" returned 
early from UNGA to attend aspecial cabinet session on 
Thursday.  Before departing New York, he raised the issue 
with Javier Solana, the EU\'s high representative for the 
common foreign and security policy, who, according to Vajgl, 
assured that he would talk with Croatian authorities. 
Slovenia\'s Ambassador to the EU, Ciril Stokelj, has informed 
the European Commission of the incident and plans to raise it 
in the EU Council as well. 
 
5.  (U) Late Thursday, the GoS cabinet adopted the position 
that the actions of the Croatian police make it impossible 
for Slovenia to further support Croatia\'s entry into the EU. 
 
---------------------------- 
STOP, AND TAKE A DEEP BREATH 
---------------------------- 
 
6. (U)  Can cooler heads prevail in this situation?  Some are 
trying.  The EU Ambassador to Slovenia, Erwan Fouere has said 
the \"first plea would be one of taking a step back and trying 
to avoid any escalation of the matter.\"  Fouere says the 
European Commission is awaiting a full report on the incident 
and that \"as with all these situations, there seem to be two 
versions.\"  In response to PM Rop\'s threat to withdraw 
Slovenia\'s support for Croatia\'s EU membership, Fouere said 
that all acknowledge the long-term goal of bringing Croatia 
and other Southeastern European countries into the EU fold - 
\"the quicker we can do that, the quicker we can avoid such 
potential situations.\" 
 
 
7. (U)  Several Slovene voices have also piped up to try to 
turn down the heat on this incident.  In Brussels, Borut 
Pahor, president of the junior ruling coalition member United 
List of Social Democrats (ZLSD) and member of European 
Parliament has said that \"we must act prudently so as not to 
lose credibility and give the appearance in the EU that we 
are using tense bilateral relations as an excuse to block 
Croatia\'s bid to join the EU.\"  He continued that while 
Slovenia had a legitimate right to highlight \"un-European\" 
actions of Croatia, it is also of the \"opinion that bilateral 
issues should not figure in decisions on whether to accept 
new EU candidates.\" 
 
8. (U)  Bojko Bucar, a foreign relations lecturer at the 
University of Ljubljana commented that temporary withdrawal 
for Croatia\'s EU accession \"was not the right thing to do.\" 
Bucar also pointed out that Wednesday\'s event was neither 
unique nor unprecedented in cross-border relations, simply, 
it is the one that has created the greatest stir.  The head 
of the Slovene Chamber of Commerce, a powerful business 
organization that all Slovene companies are compelled to 
join, said he was \"troubled\" by the incident on the border, 
and he warned politicians not to undermine the good business 
relations enjoyed by the two sides. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
9. (SBU)  Post has characterized past border incidents as 
minor irritants in an otherwise good, if not warm, bilateral 
relationship.  What is different this time is that it has 
happened just before what promise to be very close elections, 
and a high-profile member of Parliament was involved.  This 
was a blatant political stunt by the SLS.  They certainly 
knew what the outcome would be and cannot deny their role as 
provocateur.  However, as planned, it is likely to gain them 
votes in two weeks.  There was no other realistic response 
that any other party could have offered but outrage without 
certain disaster at the polls.  Despite the position taken by 
the government today, the LDS ruling party may still suffer a 
little as a result of this incident.  In the past, the GoS 
has not gotten involved when Joras has been arrested - at 
least several times a year.  There are also reports that the 
GoS did not respond to requests for assistance until the 
incident made radio and television news that evening.  Now 
everyone is making hay. 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"21996","10/25/2004 11:26","04LJUBLJANA976","Embassy Ljubljana","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","C O N F I D E N T I A L  LJUBLJANA 000976 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR: EUR/NCE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/22/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, SI, OSCE 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA IN THE BIG LEAGUES NOW: DAS CONLEY HELPS 
REDEFINE THE U.S.- SLOVENIA BILATERAL RELATIONSHIP 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Thomas B. Robertson Reasons 1.5 (b), (d) 
 
1.  SUMMARY: (U) The visit of DAS Heather Conley to Ljubljana 
October 20-21 was well timed to take advantage of the 
momentum created by the arrival of a new U.S.ambassador.  Her 
meetings at the MFA, MOD and with a small group of 
influential private citizens have helped us to galvanize and 
re-focus key parts of the Government of Slovenia (GOS) on 
re-invigorating our bilateral dialogue and re-confirming the 
importance of the trans-Atlantic relationship. 
 
2.  (U)  From the MFA, DAS Conley and the Ambassador met with 
the Number 2 person on policy, State Secretary Andrej Logar. 
Vojislav Suc, Director of the Americas Department, and Marija 
Adanja, Director of European Integration, hosted a small 
lunch, which was followed by meetings at the MFA with Zorica 
Cimpersek, Deputy Director of NATO office, Ida Mocivnik, 
Director of Neighboring Countries Department, and OSCE Task 
Force Director Aleksander Gerzina.  At the Ministry of 
Defense, DAS Conley met with State Secretary for Military 
Affairs Milan Jazbec and the Director of Defense Policy, Uros 
Krek (septel).  On Wednesday evening, Ambassador hosted a 
dinner in honor of DAS Conley\'s visit, which included a very 
interesting cross-section of private sector and NGO leaders, 
as well as the Mayor of Ljubljana. END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------- 
EXPANDING BILATERAL CONTACT 
--------------------------- 
 
3.  (C)  The meeting with State Secretary Logar provided an 
opportunity to touch on the most important current bilateral 
issues.  Scheduled to last only 30 minutes, the State 
Secretary allowed the meeting to run over by nearly 15 
 
SIPDIS 
minutes, which is a strong indication of the very positive 
discourse between Logar and Conley. The theme of this meeting 
was improving and expanding our bilateral relationship. The 
last 18 months have been heavily focused on NATO and EU 
accession.  Now that Slovenia is at the table on both counts, 
they agreed that it was time to refresh our bilateral agenda. 
Conley proposed that both governments should now try to make 
more space and time to build our bilateral relationship, and 
with Slovenia holding the OSCE CiO, the opportunity for 
contacts and dialogue will be greatly expanded.  In addition, 
the meeting covered a number of issues which were also woven 
through many of the other meetings on DAS Conley\'s schedule: 
the fact that Slovenia should be extremely proud of its 
contribution in Afghanistan (especially at this historical 
moment of democratic elections); the superior effort the GOS 
has made to get ahead of the curve on the OSCE chairmanship; 
and the importance of getting the radiation detection 
monitors (portals) installed in the Port of Koper as key to 
our joint efforts in the War on Terror. 
 
4.  (C)  Logar was very receptive to the positive message 
conveyed by DAS Conley.  He practically beamed when 
complimented on Slovenia\'s ISAF contributions, saying the GOS 
really felt it was a privilege to be in Afghanistan at this 
turning point in history.  He agreed that we needed to 
re-invigorate and broaden our bilateral relationship and that 
the new Slovene Foreign Minister would want to visit 
Washington as soon as feasible after assuming the OSCE CiO. 
He suggested, too, that the new Slovene PM would want to 
travel to Washington early in the second quarter of 2005.  On 
the Portals, Logar apologized for delays, saying that there 
should be no further obstacles.  He further explained that 
the \"EU is quite an animal\" and that Slovenia is still 
learning how to live with EU institutions.  Logar expressed 
some concern that the EU was becoming a federal institution 
dominated by a couple large countries.  Slovenes are very 
sensitive to the idea that, after less than 14 years of 
independence, they not lose their identity in another 
federation.  He mentioned that small and medium-sized members 
would join forces to present alternative ideas and to act as 
a counterweight to the more powerful members\' agendas.  Logar 
was also very positive on expanding the EU by bringing in 
\"Croatia as soon as possible, and Turkey\" without any caveat. 
 
 
5.  (C)  Logar raised Slovenia\'s contributions to Iraq by 
announcing that the GOS was about to (and has, see Ljubljana 
967) approve a EUR 50,000 donation to the UN Protection Force 
in Iraq.  (NOTE: After the meeting, DCM received a call from 
Americas Director Suc explaining that the GOS would not 
publicize the UN Protection Force donation.) In a short 
discussion on how to best handle the Slovene press, Logar 
suggested taking a very positive approach, as Conley had done 
with him.  As he said \"we\'ve made a good many reforms, but 
 
 
not in the media\" (much of which is consistently 
anti-American and rabidly opposes U.S. policy on Iraq). 
Logar went on to explain a little of the Slovene personality. 
\"We are complicated and strange, but deep inside we have a 
high appreciation for the U.S.\" 
 
6.  (U)  In addition to the meeting with Logar, DAS Conley 
focused Director of the Americas Department Suc on a few 
other pressing bilateral issues.  She raised the problems our 
investors have breaking into the market, expanding their 
business and getting fair treatment by the courts.  In 
bringing up the issues of the Portals, Suc identified himself 
as the self-appointed engine behind getting this deal done. 
He has taken on this mission and assures us he is on the 
phone every day goading and cajoling various players to move 
the process forward. 
 
---- 
OSCE 
---- 
 
7.  (U)  The entire MFA clearly sees the OSCE CiO as, by far, 
its most consuming task in the next year.  Every one of DAS 
Conley\'s meetings highlighted Slovenia\'s great upcoming 
responsibilities in the OSCE.  OSCE Task Force Director 
Gerzina laid out Slovenia\'s plan which he termed \"realistic\" 
rather than \"ambitious.\"  In the Human Dimension, Slovenia 
will focus on migration and integration, and trafficking in 
human beings.  On political/security issues, Slovenia wants 
to do something on port and container security.  We have 
enlisted Gerzina in our push to see the Portals installed in 
Koper, as this would truly make Koper a state-of-the-art 
example within the OSCE.  He emphasized that given all the 
pressing issues on frozen conflicts \"trying to melt,\" Russia, 
budgets and the selection of a Secretary General, Slovenia 
would \"not forget the Balkans.\"  Gerzina said the GOS 
supports the US position on a special representative on 
anti-Semitism.  He also gave the dates for the Ljubljana 
Ministerial as December 8-9, 2005.  Overall, Gerzina, while 
fully comprehending the enormous task ahead, said that he was 
optimistic about Slovenia\'s year in leadership of the OSCE. 
 
---- 
NATO 
---- 
 
8.  (SBU)  In her meetings with Zorica Cimpersek on NATO and 
defense issues at the MFA, DAS Conley focused on Slovenia\'s 
contributions to ISAF and in the region.  Cimpersek said that 
Slovenia was glad to be in Iraq and that it would even be 
increasing its presence to 40 by March 2005.  However, the 
GOS has not projected its contributions beyond mid 2005.  In 
meetings at the MOD, Conley, joined by COM in his first visit 
to the MOD, focused on \"expanding the bilateral 
relationship,\" commending Slovenia for its contributions in 
Afghanistan and acknowledging its strong interest in playing 
a peacekeeping role in its own neighborhood of Southeastern 
Europe.  She urged the Slovenes to focus on \"complementarity\" 
- not competition - as they pursue defense reforms with an 
eye to contributing to both NATO and EU-led operations.  She 
engaged Jazbec and, on a more detailed level, Krek, in a 
discussion of the challenges that face the MOD and the 
Slovene Armed Forces moving forward.  Conley elicited the 
MOD\'s assessment that the \"strong\" Slovenian commitment to 
spend two percent of GDP on defense by 2008 is \"firm\" and 
will be supported even more strongly by the incoming 
center-right government.  The current DATT characterized the 
briefing as one of the best bilateral exchanges on defense 
issues in the last year. (septel to follow) 
 
-- 
EU 
-- 
 
9.  (SBU) It is clear that Slovenia is going through a 
somewhat tougher-than-expected period of adjustment to its EU 
membership.  It has to manage the psychic shift from grateful 
recipient of EU largesse to full member who will, within a 
few short years, likely become a net contributor.  Because 
Slovenia just went through a referendum on joining the EU, 
the Head of EU Integration, Marija Adanja, doesn\'t believe 
there will be a need for a referendum on either joining the 
Euro or ratifying the new constitution.  In the discussion on 
trade and investment, Adanja explained that some Slovenes 
equated foreign investment with instability, jobs would be 
lost, assets removed from the country.  DAS Conley pointed 
out that the EU had written its own report to the contrary, 
so if the GOS had trouble making the foreign direct 
 
 
investment case to the public using American examples, it 
certainly has authoritative European sources from which to 
draw. 
 
 
---------------------- 
CROATIA AND THE REGION 
---------------------- 
 
10.  (U)  In none of the meetings was Croatia\'s EU membership 
ever mentioned as being at risk.  From the head of EU 
integration, to the Director for Neighboring Countries to 
State Secretary Logar, Slovenia\'s policy to ensure Croatia\'s 
swift entry into the EU was reiterated.  Slovenia\'s year as 
CiO of the OSCE will also help bring more focus on Slovenia\'s 
broader Balkan agenda with SFOR/EUFOR, KFOR and 
Serbia-and-Montenegro.  The GOS also views US presence in the 
region as imperative and was very interested in any plans we 
might have for reduction of forces. 
 
-------------------------- 
VIEWS FROM OUTSIDE THE GOS 
-------------------------- 
 
11.  (C)  The Ambassador hosted a small dinner which included 
academics, heads of NGOs, the Mayor of Ljubljana and former 
politicians.  The dinner was a very successful forum for 
drawing out usually reserved Slovenes on some particularly 
sensitive issues.  The press and its treatment of current 
issues and its ability to print outright lies without 
negative repercussions dominated the conversation.  The 
attitude at all levels of ownership and responsibility of the 
press was summed up by one guest as \"everyone is responsible 
for everything, and noone is responsible for anything.\"  The 
lack of willingness to take responsibility, a lack of 
openness and an aversion to risk were also identified by the 
dinner guests as general attributes of Slovenes.  The group 
also reached a strong consensus that Slovenes really are not 
as anti-American as the press would make you think. 
 
------ 
VISITS 
------ 
 
12.  (U) In all meetings, the Ambassador and DAS Conley 
proposed developing a more active and dynamic exchange 
between and within the capitals.  In addition to visits by 
the future FM and PM toWashington, Gerzina again indicated 
the desire tomeet in Washington.  He is also very interested 
n meetings on the Hill with the Helsinki Commissio.  DAS 
Conley suggested that the next time DAS Kthy Stevens is in 
the region, she might stop in Ljubljana for consultations on 
Western Balkan issues, which was greeted very positively. 
 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
13.  (U)  This visit by DAS Conley was timely and effective. 
It served as a pivot point in our relationship with Slovenia. 
 Together, Conley and our interlocutors set a tone of 
cooperation and common cause. The priority of expanding our 
bilateral agenda was agreed upon with the GOS, and a 
commitment to increased dialogue at all levels identified as 
the best mechanism to do this. As Slovenia approaches its 
term as CiO at the OSCE, it is figuring out the real 
magnitude of its commitment, and it is also appreciating the 
level of support the U.S. can offer.  2005 will be an 
important year for building and strengthening our 
relationship with Slovenia.  If we can give it the attention 
it needs now, we can count on many positive returns in the 
future. 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"22022","10/26/2004 11:26","04LJUBLJANA981","Embassy Ljubljana","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","C O N F I D E N T I A L  LJUBLJANA 000981 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE AND EUR/RPM 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/25/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MARR, MCAP, MOPS, SI, NATO 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIAN MOD GIVES DAS CONLEY DEFENSE REFORM 
SNAPSHOT ON THE EVE OF A NEW GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Classified By: Chief of Mission Thomas B. Robertson for reasons 1.5(b) 
and (d). 
 
1.  (C) SUMMARY:  DAS Heather Conley engaged high level MoD 
officials in a productive dialogue about the current status 
and future of Slovenian defense reforms during meetings on 21 
October.  Both State Secretary Milan Jazbec and State 
Undersecretary Uros Krek described the Slovenian commitment 
to spend two percent of GDP on defense by 2008 as firm.  They 
also provided a detailed outline of plans to use those funds 
to pursue NATO Force Goals.  Krek highlighted the challenge 
of training Slovenia\'s future civilian and military leaders, 
but he characterized MoD and SAF morale positively.  Krek 
also outlined Slovenia\'s out-of-area troop commitments, 
highlighting a Force Goal-focused budgeting process and a 
policy not to place national caveats on troops.  He 
underscored Slovenia\'s commitment to NATO-led missions by 
emphasizing that Slovenia ranks fourth among the Allies in 
percentage of active troops deployed abroad.  Krek reiterated 
the Slovenian policy of participating in a NATO Iraq training 
mission only in a third country.  Jazbec and Krek provided a 
comprehensive snapshot of bilateral defense issues that 
describe a baseline for the new Slovenian Government to build 
upon when it is formed.  END SUMMARY 
 
2.  (C) On 21 October, DAS Heather Conley met with MoD State 
Secretary Milan Jazbec and State Undersecretary Uros Krek, 
 
SIPDIS 
who serves as Director of the Office for Defense Policy. 
Jazbec and Krek were accompanied by Mr. Jursa, Head of the 
Department of Analysis; Tadej Burger, Head of the NATO 
Department; and Aljosa Selan, U.S. Desk Officer.  COM, DATT, 
and Pol-Miloff joined Conley, who commended Slovenia for its 
contributions to ISAF; acknowledged Slovenia\'s strong 
interest in playing a peacekeeping role in its 
\"neighborhood\"; and urged the Slovenes to focus on 
complementarity - not competition - as they pursue defense 
reforms with an eye to contributing to both NATO and EU-led 
operations.  Conley then launched what the DATT called one of 
the best dialogues he has seen with MoD officials by asking 
pointed questions about Slovenian Armed Forces (SAF) 
capabilities, the future of Slovenian defense spending, and 
the most significant challenges facing the MoD moving forward. 
 
JAZBEC\'S OVERVIEW: TWO PERCENT GOAL FIRM UNDER NEW GOV\'T 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
3.  (C) After introductory remarks highlighting Slovenia\'s 
future as a security player in the Western Balkans and a 
positive assessment of SAF professionalization over the past 
two years, Jazbec agreed with Conley about the importance of 
complementarity.  Jazbec also made the point that NATO 
membership for Slovenia actually increases the importance of 
bilateral relations with the U.S.  He said Slovenia will now 
have an opportunity to live up to expectations that it will 
become a regional leader.  With respect to Slovenia\'s 
upcoming Chairmanship of the OSCE in 2005, Jazbec said the 
MoD is looking for ways to contribute, particularly in 
Southeastern Europe but also possibly in the Caucasus. 
 
4.  (C) In response to Conley\'s question about future defense 
spending, in light of the Slovenian commitment to NATO to 
devote two percent of GDP to defense by 2008, Jazbec said 
Slovenia\'s \"strong commitment\" is \"firm.\"  He noted that the 
commitment would likely be bolstered in the coming weeks when 
the strongly pro-NATO center-right parties form a new 
Government on the heels of the 03 October national elections. 
 In response to a question about niche capabilities for use 
in the NATO Response Force (NRF) and elsewhere, Jazbec noted 
Slovenia\'s plans to contribute an NBC Battalion for NATO\'s 
High Readiness Forces by the end of the decade, with an NBC 
platoon to be in place by January 2005 for the NRF.  He 
mentioned the further development of the Mountain School in 
Pokljuka, highlighted Slovenia\'s PfP language center, and 
identified \"communications\" as an area of development. 
 
5.  (C) When asked about the most significant challenges 
facing the MoD, Jazbec responded that \"individuals need to 
cope on an institutional basis with the challenges NATO 
membership brings to Slovenia.\"  (NOTE: Jazbec\'s comment 
probably refers to an on-going dynamic within MoD concerning 
the reorganization of the bureaucracy to deal with NATO 
integration, as well as the continuing effort to change 
 
 
individuals\' mindsets from a focus on national defense to a 
focus on collective security.  While the change in mindset 
has been mostly successful, MoD still suffers from a shortage 
of people to deal with the increased workload brought on by 
NATO and EU memberhsip.  END NOTE)  Jazbec also highlighted 
the public diplomacy challenge of translating the day-to-day 
support of NATO operations by the GoS into policies supported 
by public opinion.  He said the GoS learned to work as an 
institution to accomplish a similar goal during the March 
2003 NATO referendum, but he stressed the need to continue 
such work now that Slovenia is a member of the Alliance. 
Optimistically, Jazbec noted that - for the first time in its 
history - Slovenia will soon have a Prime Minister with a 
background in Defense Studies.  \"Jansa has a very sensitive 
ear for these issues... I know this well,\" he said, inferring 
that he is close to Jansa himself.  (NOTE:  Jazbec said that 
he would soon return to the MFA; however, he did not mention 
in what capacity. END NOTE) 
 
CONLEY/KREK DIALOGUE: PLANS IN PLACE FOR CONTINUED REFORMS 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
6.  (C) Thanking Conley for more than a decade of USG 
support, Krek drew attention to what he deemed the most 
important component of that support:  the training and 
education of Slovenia\'s civilian and military personnel. 
Emphasizing the success of the Slovenian defense 
establishment in changing the prevailing mindset from one of 
territorial defense to a collective defense model, Krek gave 
the following rundown of facts and figures before responding 
to a series of probing questions by Conley: 
 
--  reduction in the SAF reserves from 71,000 in 1999 to a 
projected 5,500 in 2010; 
--  obligations of the last conscripted reservists will end 
in 2010; and 
--  numbers for active duty soldiers as a result of 
professionalization:  4,500 in 1999; approximately 7,000 
today; and a projected 8,500 in 2010. 
 
He mentioned that Slovenia\'s new \"voluntary conscription 
service program\" is more successful than the MoD anticipated, 
providing three months of paid survival and basic skills 
training to young Slovenes considering a career in the SAF or 
the reserves.  Noting that the MoD finalized its Strategic 
Defense Review last February, he said Parliament has approved 
a Defense Plan through 2015, to be amended every four years. 
MoD has approved a six-year Defense Program, to be amended 
every two years.  The six-year Program will be submitted for 
approval when a new Government is formed. 
 
GOOD MORALE: A \"GREEN LIGHT\" FOR FURTHER REFORMS 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
7.  (C) Conley asked how the MoD and SAF are handling all of 
the recent changes, and Krek replied that a critical mass in 
the MoD supports the defense reforms, saying \"there is a big 
green light\" to move forward.  He then shifted focus to the 
soldiers on the ground in international operations.  Having 
just visited SAF troops in Bosnia, Krek said the \"motivation 
is there\" for the units to accomplish their missions.  (NOTE: 
 Krek conspicuously failed to mention the morale of the 
General Staff and the SAF military leadership, perhaps 
reflecting the frustrations of DefMin Anton Grizold with a 
CHOD, Major General Ladislav Lipic, whom he has sometimes 
characterized to DATT as slow-moving.  DATT has observed 
other indications that the MoD civilian staff and the General 
Staff are not always \"in synch\" with respect to the pace of 
reforms.  END NOTE) 
 
OUT-OF-AREA OPERATIONS: NO CAPS AND NO CAVEATS 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
8.  (C) Conley asked about troops abroad, generally, with 
specific follow-up questions about the budgeting process for 
out-of-area operations, caps on troop contributions, and 
national caveats.  Krek said that a budget consistent with 
NATO Force Goals, encompassing out-of-area operations, has 
been proposed as part of the six-year Defense Program.  If 
future events necessitate sending a unit out-of-area earlier 
than expected, he said the interim two-year review would have 
to be adjusted to reflect that reality.  Krek said the GoS 
 
 
had discussed setting a limit on the number of troops they 
would send abroad under a \"Framework Plan.\"  Current 
limitations are budgetary, though, and he said there are no 
legislated caps on the number of deployable troops.  The GoS 
can decide to commit troops for international missions, but 
it cannot commit reservists. 
 
9.  (C) Krek said he is personally pleased with \"a purposeful 
policy not to place national caveats\" on troop commitments. 
There are no caveats on SFOR troops.  Certain restrictions 
have been placed on SAF troops in KFOR, though, in response 
to an earlier situation in which uniformed soldiers in a 
Slovenian Multilateral Service Unit (MSU) were used for riot 
control procedures that had been proscribed for other 
countries\' troops.  (Conley noted that the KFOR dynamic was a 
perfect example of why national caveats are 
counter-productive.) 
 
10.  (C) Slovenia currently has 237 troops stationed abroad, 
according to Krek.  That figure will rise to approximately 
300 by May 2005.  Krek noted the reconnaissance unit and two 
firefighters currently deployed with ISAF.  He said a 
veterinary attachment would be sent to Afghanistan soon and 
that the GoS is discussing the possibility of sending two PRT 
liaison officers.  Slvenia plans to maintain its 
participation in ISAF with increases through the end of 
2007, he said, noting that the firefighters are committed 
through the end of 2006.  The SAF platoon of military police 
in Kosovo is committed to KFOR through 2006.  Slovenia has 
contributed a company, two MP platoons and a medical unit to 
SFOR.  Their contributions in Bosnia will increase with the 
EU takeover of SFOR later this year.  Starting in early 2007, 
Krek said the Slovenes will have a battalion prepared for 
deployment within the Balkans. 
 
HOST NATION SUPPORT: DEVELOPING CERKLJE AIRFIELD 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
11.  (C) Conley asked if Slovenia already has its Host Nation 
Support requirements in place, particularly the requirement 
for a NATO-designated airfield.  Krek responded that \"most of 
the basics are in place.\"  He also stated that Slovenia will 
participate in NATO\'s \"core airfield study\" with the focus on 
the military airfield at Cerklje.  Ceklje requires 
improvements before it can be designated a NATO-capable 
airfield.  Brnik International Airport will, therefore, 
remain Slovenia\'s NATO-designated airfield until 2007. 
 
AIR POLICING: SATISFIED WITH ITALIAN COVERAGE 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
12.  (C) Krek told Conley that Slovenia is \"satisfied with 
what is currently in place\" with regard to Italian 
air-policing.  He said the Italians have committed to police 
Slovenian airspace for three more rotations and that they 
have expressed a willingness to continue even further into 
the future.  Slovenia has no plans to procure aircraft for 
its own air policing missions, said Krek, adding that NATO 
had advised them against this because it would endanger 
Slovenia\'s ability to fulfill its Force Goals.  Conley said, 
emphatically, \"Well done!  I second that.\" 
 
PUBLIC DIPLOMACY: NO BUYERS REMORSE 
----------------------------------- 
 
13.  (C) Conley asked Krek to elaborate on the public 
diplomacy aspects of being a NATO member and whether Slovenes 
had experienced any residual \"buyers remorse.\"  Krek framed 
his answer in a parliamentary context, noting that the 
Defense Plans he mentioned earlier had the political support 
of a majority of parties from the outgoing Parliament (which 
had its last session on 22 October).  Generally, he said he 
expects no changes with the new Parliament, emphasizing that 
budget figures certainly will not change.  Nonetheless, he 
said that reaching two percent of GDP for defense spending by 
2008 will require \"firm discipline\" by politicians, 
parliamentarians, and the public.  He noted that two percent 
of GDP today translates into approximately 400 million euros. 
 By 2010, that figure should equal about 700 million euros, 
he said. 
 
TWO PERCENT: A FIRM GOAL 
 
 
------------------------ 
 
14.  (C) When pushed by Conley on the strength of Slovenia\'s 
commitment to reach the two percent goal by 2008, Krek said 
he is \"fully confident\" it will be met.  Within that figure, 
though, he stressed the importance of allocating funds 
sensibly.  For example, he mentioned the goal of reaching a 
50/30/20 formula for defense expenditures, with 50 percent of 
the budget going for personnel costs, 30 percent for 
operations and maintenance, and 20 percent for modernization. 
 When Conley mentioned that 50 percent for personnel seemed 
high, Krek pointed out that current personnel costs consume 
64 percent of the Slovenian defense budget.  Over the next 
six years, Krek said Slovenia would spend around 600 million 
euros on modernization, with a focus on achieving NATO Force 
Goals, including the development of infantry and NBC 
battalions; intelligence gathering capabilities; command and 
control; and strategic lift capabilities (both air and sea). 
 
STRATEGIC LIFT THROUGH NATO CONTRACT POOLS 
------------------------------------------ 
 
15.  (C) Questioned later by DATT about air and sea lift 
capabilities, Krek said that Slovenia already has in place 
two strategic lift agreements within NATO.  These agreements 
are to participate in the NATO contract pools for strategic 
air- and sealift.  In the event Slovenia were to require 
strategic lift, the Slovenes would identify their air or sea 
requirements to NATO, where available resources would be 
identified and contracted. 
 
TRAINING: THE MOST IMPORTANT CHALLENGE 
-------------------------------------- 
 
16.  (C) Krek told Conley that the most important challenge 
facing the MoD and the SAF is training personnel, 
particularly increasing the number of staff officers who can 
operate in an international context and educating both 
civilian officials and politicians about defense matters. 
Krek, an ICAF alum himself, praised the IMET program in this 
regard.  He did mention, though, that it is sometimes a 
difficult balancing act for the MoD to release its best and 
brightest for long-term training when they are needed 
desperately in the Ministry. 
 
A SLOVENIAN ROLE IN IRAQ: TRAINING OK IN A THIRD COUNTRY 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
17.  (C) Krek steered the conversation toward Iraq, noting 
that Conley had not mentioned the issue earlier.  He said 
Slovenia intends to support a NATO training mission by 
providing instructors and/or equipment.  Echoing what other 
GoS officials have said before, he stressed that Slovenian 
instructors would train Iraqis only in a third country, i.e. 
neither in Iraq nor in Slovenia.  He said the GoS supports 
deputing SAF officers to NATO Headquarters.  Krek said that 
Slovenia is now \"completely stretched\" with its current 
overseas troop commitments.  That said, he called attention 
to the fact that Slovenia ranks fourth among NATO Allies in 
the percentage (approximately three percent) of its troops 
committed to out-of-area NATO missions.  Canada, Norway, and 
Germany outrank Slovenia, he said. 
 
18.  (C) Conley said she understands the sensitivities in 
Slovenia about Iraq and that the USG would like its allies to 
participate.  She said the Iraqis have great appreciation for 
Slovenian contributions to the reconstruction of Iraq in the 
fields of demining, police training, and psychological 
assistance to children. 
 
KREK\'S QUESTIONS: U.S. BALKANS POLICY AND ISAF/OEF MERGER 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
19.  (C) Krek ventured two questions toward the end of the 
conversation:  he asked for Conley\'s views on the future 
activities of the USG in the Balkans and on the merger of 
ISAF and OEF.  Conley said the U.S. will remain \"very engaged 
politically\" in the transition process but that it is 
\"appropriate to allow the EU to assume greater 
responsibilities in the Balkans.\"  She expressed optimism 
that the transition will be successful despite the withdrawal 
of NATO in Bosnia.  On the ISAF/OEF merger, Conley said the 
 
 
Military Committee at NATO would have to look at this and 
predicted it would involve a long-term process.  She 
stressed, though, that efforts are underway to make PRTs in 
Afghanistan more robust and to tackle the counter-narcotics 
issue. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
20.  (C) Conley\'s knowledge of the issues and incisive 
questioning ensured that the meetings at MoD - indeed, the 
first meetings in the MoD building for COM - provided one of 
the most insightful and comprehensive assessments we have 
received to date of where Slovenia stands on defense reforms 
and where it intends to go in the future.  At the same time, 
she delivered the well-received message that the U.S. wishes 
to continue strengthening and expanding its bilateral 
relationship with Slovenia.  The dialogue with Jazbec was 
fruitful in providing a general overview of recent reforms. 
His comments on the new center-right Government were also of 
interest, particularly the suggestion that he has close ties 
to Janez Jansa, whom we assume will be the next Prime 
Minister.  We will watch with interest to see where Jazbec 
lands upon his return to the MFA.  Krek lived up to his 
reputation as the Embassy\'s most engaged contact in the MoD. 
His insight and influence as an analyst of defense policy 
have been a direct result of the trust and confidence placed 
in him by DefMin Grizold and the IMET training he received at 
the National Defense University.  Despite imminent changes in 
the political leadership of the MoD, we expect Krek to 
provide the continuity and working-level leadership that will 
be needed at MoD in the coming months.  END COMMENT 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"23014","11/19/2004 3:39","04LJUBLJANA1053","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 001053 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE, DRL/CRA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PINR, SI 
SUBJECT:  SLOVENIA: COM\'S COURTESY CALL ON HUMAN RIGHTS 
OMBUDSMAN MATJAZ HANZEK 
 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified - please protect 
accordingly. 
 
1.  (SBU) SUMMARY.  On November 16, COM, accompanied by 
the Embassy\'s PD/Human Rights Officer, paid a call on 
Slovenia\'s Ombudsman for Human Rights, Matjaz Hanzek. 
Hanzek expressed concern with some of the positions and 
public statements made by members of the rightist and 
center-right parties after their strong showing in the 
October 3 election.  (NOTE: In the election, the center- 
right Slovenian Democratic Party, or SDS, won a 
plurality of the vote and is currently in the process 
of trying to form a coalition government with other 
centrist and center-right parties.  END NOTE).  Hanzek 
also enumerated what he considered to be the three main 
human rights issues facing Slovenia today: (1) the 
longstanding issue of the \"erased,\" which concerns 
those former Yugoslav citizens who were deleted from 
Slovenia\'s register of permanent residents shortly 
after Slovenia declared independence in 1991; (2) 
prevarication on the adoption of a bill that would 
regulate domestic partnerships for gays and lesbians; 
and (3) the social and political status of Slovenia\'s 
Roma community.  COM also asked Hanzek about domestic 
violence, hate speech, and court backlogs.  After going 
over the litany of human rights problems facing 
Slovenia, Hanzek smiled and concluded by saying that 
Slovenia still compared favorably to most other 
countries around the world and that he was \"optimistic\" 
about the future.  END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Slovenia\'s New Center-Right Government 
-------------------------------------- 
 
2. (SBU) When asked about the new center-right 
government that is currently in the process of being 
formed, Hanzek told us he was \"deeply troubled\" by the 
past actions and public statements of those now about 
to assume power.  Hanzek noted that the newly elected 
President of the Parliament, Franc Cukjati of the SDS, 
had spearheaded a 2001 referendum drive to deny single 
women the right to undergo artificial insemination. 
(NOTE:  The referendum was held on June 17, 2001 and 
failed to pass, thus denying deny single women the 
right to artificial insemination.  END NOTE).  Hanzek 
argued that by supporting the defeat of the referendum, 
Cukjati had contributed to the violation of single 
women\'s human rights. 
 
3. (SBU) Hanzek also voiced concern over remarks made 
by the Deputy President of the Parliament, Saso Pece (a 
member of the rightist Slovenian Nationalist Party, or 
SNS), who claimed publicly that he never wanted to have 
coffee with someone who was black or gay.  Finally, 
Hanzek also noted that the Prime Minister-designate, 
Janez Jansa of the SDS, had backed a referendum over 
the question of the \"erased\" that would have challenged 
a decision by Slovenia\'s Constitutional Court.  Hanzek 
argued that by promoting the referendum, Jansa had 
demonstrated his complete lack of respect for the rule 
of law. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Protecting the Rights of Slovenia\'s Minorities 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
3. (U) On the issue of the \"erased,\" Hanzek noted that 
it was unacceptable to continue to deny claims for 
permanent residency to individuals simply because they 
were former members of the Yugoslav army who had failed 
to apply for citizenship during a six-month window in 
1991-92.  Hanzek noted that he hoped the new government 
would begin issuing permanent residency to such 
individuals forthwith but doubted that this would 
happen. 
 
4. (U) Hanzek also told us that the delay in the 
adoption of a law regulating domestic partnerships for 
gay and lesbian citizens was limiting their human 
rights.  He expressed concern that this \"first step\" in 
the \"struggle for equality\" might languish in the new 
parliament dominated by center-right parties. 
 
5. (U) Hanzek noted that the social and political 
status of Slovenia\'s Roma population was also 
unacceptable and that improvements were needed to 
 
 
further integrate the Roma into Slovene society.  He 
argued that at present Roma citizens simply do not have 
truly equal opportunities in employment, housing and 
education. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Domestic Violence, Hate Speech, and Court Backlogs 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
6. (U) Responding to COM\'s question about domestic 
violence, Hanzek told us that a draft law on domestic 
violence was currently awaiting parliamentary 
modification and approval.  Hanzek informed us that the 
Council of Europe was planning to hold a ministerial- 
level conference on domestic violence and child abuse 
in Ljubljana in July and that he hoped the conference 
would push the government to put legislation in place 
by then. 
 
7. (SBU) On the issue of hate speech, Hanzek informed 
us that his office would be holding an exhibition on 
December 9 in commemoration of Human Rights Day that 
would document hate speech by prominent Slovenian 
politicians and public figures.  Hanzek told us the 
exhibition would include comments made by SNS party 
leader Zmago Jelincic, who stated on the floor of the 
parliament that Slovenes should begin collecting guns 
to protect ourselves from the Roma population. 
 
8. (U) On the issue of court backlogs, Hanzek agreed 
that the situation was unacceptable, particularly in 
child abuse and custody cases, where delays directly 
impact both the human rights and wellbeing of children. 
 
-------- 
Comment 
-------- 
 
9. (SBU) Throughout our meeting, Hanzek did not hide 
his distrust for the newly elected parliamentarians 
from the center-right and rightist parties.  Despite 
his clear personal preference for the parties of the 
center-left, Hanzek\'s concerns about the new 
government\'s stance towards human rights are real.  At 
this point, it is still too early to tell whether and 
how the newly elected government will deal with the 
issues he enumerated.  Some issues, like that of the 
\"erased\" and domestic violence, will have to be settled 
quickly if Slovenia does not want to isolate itself 
within the EU.  Other issues, however, like domestic 
partnerships for gays and lesbians, are likely to be 
bypassed in the coming parliamentary term.  Post will 
continue to monitor and report on human rights issues 
as they emerge. 
 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"23104","11/22/2004 2:52","04LJUBLJANA1061","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04LJUBLJANA1047","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 001061 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE, EUR/ERA, EB 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO USTR/ERRION 
USDOC FOR 4232/ITA/MAC/EUR/OEERIS/SAVICH 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, ETRD, ELAB, PGOV, PINR, SI 
SUBJECT: COM MEETS BANK OF SLOVENIA GOVERNOR 
 
REF: LJUBLJANA 1047 
 
1.  (U) SUMMARY: Ambassador paid a courtesy call on Bank of 
Slovenia\'s (BOS) Governor Mitja Gaspari on 17 November. 
Gaspari, BOS Governor since 2001 and a former Minister of 
Finance, highlighted the stable macroeconomic position of 
Slovenia and was optimistic about the planned introduction 
of the Euro in 2007.  Gaspari expects the new government 
will maintain a good relationship with the BOS.  Commenting 
on the much talked about privatization of current state- 
owned firms, Gaspari stated that he thinks that Slovenia 
should encourage greater competition in sectors to be 
privatized prior to any sales of the state-owned stakes. 
Gaspari also confirmed that the BOS and Slovenia would 
welcome an American banking investment.  End summary. 
 
-------------- 
Stable economy 
-------------- 
 
2.  (U) Gaspari pointed out that BOS\'s main objective is to 
keep a stable macroeconomic situation in Slovenia.  He 
proudly explained that the inflation rate has been dropping 
and the exchange rate is stable. (Note: Inflation in 2003 
was 5.6%; current expectations for 2004 show likely 
inflation of approximately 3.3%. End note.)  Gaspari 
highlighted the good relationship that the BOS enjoys with 
the outgoing Government of Slovenia (GOS) and hopes that 
this will continue when the new government takes over.  He 
stressed a need for a strong, coherent government to work on 
economic restructuring and to implement health and pension 
sector reforms. 
 
-------------------- 
Introduction of Euro 
-------------------- 
 
3.  (U) Gaspari expects successful completion of the ERM II 
probationary period and is optimistic that Slovenia should 
have no trouble adopting the Euro as its currency in early 
2007.  He noted that a failure in the next year to meet the 
Maastricht criteria for Euro introduction could postpone the 
project for many years.  When COM mentioned the weakening 
dollar, Gaspari commented that this has actually helped 
mitigate the impact of high oil prices.  On the other hand, 
he mentioned, Slovenian trade with the Euro zone may face 
competitive challenges in the long run because of a stronger 
Euro. (Note: Slovenia is heavily reliant on trade and nearly 
70% of its trade is with Europe. End note.) 
 
------------------------------------- 
Competition first, then privatization 
------------------------------------- 
 
4.  (U) There has been much written in the Slovene press of 
late about the privatization of state-owned industries, in 
particular telecom.  When COM asked Gaspari for his opinion 
on this, Gaspari mentioned that a more transparent and 
competitive environment is a precondition for further 
privatization of state property in sectors like 
telecommunications or energy.  Stating that privatization is 
not a `panacea\', Gaspari commented that the real challenge 
for Slovenia is how to make the current state-owned sectors 
more competitive.  Pointing at bad experiences with 
privatization in Croatia and Hungary, Gaspari commented that 
Slovenia was lucky not to have been forced to privatize in a 
hurry because of the success and stability of the economy. 
Gaspari stated that while there is no particular need for 
the state to be involved in certain sectors of the economy, 
state property as such is not necessarily bad, referring to 
high state stakes in countries like Germany or Italy. 
Gaspari sees opportunities for new FDI in telecom as well as 
in the energy, transport and financial sectors.  He believes 
that Slovenia needs `appropriate\' investors who are willing 
to bring in new technology. 
 
------------ 
U.S. Welcome 
------------ 
 
5.  (U) When COM asked Gaspari about his well-publicized 
visits with Citicorp in the U.S., Gaspari mentioned that he 
supported the idea of U.S. investors in the banking sector. 
Having met with high-ranking officials at Citicorp several 
times, Gaspari seemed eager to attract non-European 
investment.  He stated that he did not want Slovenia to be 
`dominated by institutions from neighboring countries\'. 
 
(Note: Austrian and Italian banks are the largest foreign 
investors in the Slovene banking system. End note.)  Gaspari 
went on to say that he hoped Citicorp or another U.S. 
financial institution would look as seriously at Slovenia as 
they would at other Central European countries.  According 
to Gaspari, Citcorp is waiting for a project proposal from 
Slovenia.  Gaspari stated that this is something he would 
take up with the new government after they `settled in\' to 
their new positions.  (Comment: In a related meeting, on 18 
November COM received a courtesy call from Marjan Kramar, 
president of Nova Ljubljanska Banka, the largest commercial 
bank in Slovenia.  Kramar commented that he has also met 
with Citicorp and has explored ideas for their participation 
in the Slovene market.  Kramar indicated that while Citicorp 
may not be interested in Slovenia specifically, he mentioned 
that there could possibly be some regional niche 
opportunities in the countries of the former Yugoslavia. End 
comment.) 
 
--------------------------- 
Public-Private Partnerships 
--------------------------- 
 
6.  (U) Following on from a recent discussion withAndrej 
Bajuk, head of the New Slovenia Party (reftel), COM asked 
Gaspari about the possibility ofPublic-Private Partnerships 
(PPPs) in Slovenia. Gaspari lamented the lack of PPPs in 
Slovenia and mentioned that there should be some 
opportunitie for these types of ventures in the energy 
secto.  When COM commented that the European Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) was active i the 
Central European region and did quite a bit of work on PPPs, 
Gaspari appeared visibly frustraed.  Stating that the 
problem was `on our side\',Gaspari mentioned that while 
there was a draft lw supporting PPPs, `too many lawyers\' 
have caused the approval of the law to stall and that the 
law remained `on a shelf\'.  Echoing Bajuk (reftel), Gaspari 
commented that the use of PPPs would help the government 
optimize use of the budget. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
7.  (SBU) COM\'s first meeting with one of the critical 
players in the Slovene economy was a successful one. 
Gaspari, while naturally reserved,  is a good contact for 
post and has a favorable perception of the U.S.  Despite 
highlighting several times that the BOS is an independent 
institution, we expect Gaspari will work very closely with 
the new GOS.  While it is unclear how successful he may be 
in attracting foreign financial institutions to a market 
that other Slovene bankers have described as `overbanked\', 
he is encouraging of foreign participation in the domestic 
market. 
 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"23300","11/26/2004 10:21","04LJUBLJANA1069","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 001069 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, ECON, SI 
SUBJECT: JANSA SENT THE LIST OF CABINET CANDIDATES 
 
1.  (U) SUMMARY:  On Wednesday afternoon, November 24, after 
the signing of a coalition agreement by all four presidents 
of the coalition parties, Prime Minister Janez Jansa sent a 
list of 16 proposed ministerial candidates to the National 
Assembly for approval.  The National Assembly has seven days 
(until November 30) to approve the entire slate.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (U) The list of candidates with brief biographical 
information is as follows: 
 
-- Dr. Dimitrij Rupel (SDS), nominated for Minister of 
Foreign Affairs, was foreign minister from 2000 -- 2004 (and 
previously 1990-1993), Slovene Ambassador to US (years1997- 
2000), and Mayor of Ljubljana (1995-1997).   He was 
dismissed as FoMin just before national elections in June of 
2004. and  He then left the Liberal Democratic Party to join 
Slovene Democratic Party deputy group and run for 
Parliament.  He was also one of the initiators creators of 
the Assembly for the Republic.  (Note: during elections, 
Rupel was listed as an \"independent\" on the SDS list. 
However, in recent press, he has been identified as a member 
of SDS, and Rupel has not made a point of disagreeing with 
this characterization.) 
 
-- Dr. Gregor Virant [not affiliated but close to Jansa\'s 
SDS party] nominated as Minister for Public Administration, 
a newly established ministry under Jansa\'s government. 
Virant was a former State Secretary at the Ministry of 
Interior in charge of Public Administration reform, and 
creator of the Ministry of Public Administration.  He was 
also a member of Jansa\'s Expert Council. 
 
-- Dr. Vasko Simoniti [SDS], nominated as Minister of 
Culture, is a professor of History at the Philosophical 
Philosophy Faculty at the University of Ljubljana.   andHe 
was head of the presidential election campaign in 2002 for 
independent candidate Barbara Brezigar [supported by SDS and 
NSi]. 
 
-- Mr. Andrej Vizjak [SDS], nominated as Minister of 
Economy, is currently the mayor of Brezice and a member of 
parliament.  His main goals as minister will be reforming 
government regulation of business, especially with respect 
to administrative barriers and taxation. 
 
-- Mr. Andrej Brucan [SDS], nominated as Minister of Health, 
is vice-president of SDS and was the Minister of Health 
during Bajuk\'s government (2000). Since 1979 he has headed 
the Urgent Internal Medical Office of the Clinical Center in 
Ljubljana. 
 
-- Dr. Milan Zver, [SDS] nominated as Minister of Education, 
is the President of the SDS Council and a professor of 
Sociology at Maribor University.  He supports the idea of 
Bible study as an optional subject in primary school. 
 
-- Mr. Dragutin Mate, [SDS] nominated as the Minister of 
Interior proposed by SDS, Interior is employed in the 
Ministry of Defense as Director of the Direction Directorate 
for Defense.  He became known to  the public as a the 
Slovene Defense Attach in Sarajevo [from 1996 to 1999] 
where he was reportedly collecting information on Slovene 
Ambassador Mirosic\'s private life. and thus   He was 
recalled early back from his posting earlier.  HeMate was 
also testifyiedng in front of the Parliamentaryian 
Commission on pPost-independence wWeapons tTrade. 
 
-- Ms. Marija Lukacic, nominated for Minister of 
Agriculture, Forestry and Food and proposed by SDS (though 
not a party member), was the former Director of the Fund of 
Agricultural Land and Forests [1994 - 1999] where she was 
not very successful.  In 2000 she was nominated for the 
Director of the Office for Denationalization and in 2001 she 
returned to the Ministry of Agriculture to head the Office 
for Natural Disasters. 
 
 
-- Dr. Andrej Bajuk,[Nsi] nominated as Minister of Finance, 
is the president of NSi and a former prime minister 
[transitional government in 2000].  Bajuk worked for the 
Interamerican Development Bank in various positions from 
1977-2000.  He strongly supports privatization in Slovenia, 
especially of banks, however he has said indicated that the 
banks should stay in Slovene hands. 
 
-- Dr. Lovro Sturm, [Nsi] nominated as Minister of Justice, 
 
is a professor of law at Ljubljana University.  He is a 
former Constitutional Court Judge and was Minister of 
Education in 2000 during Bajuk\'s transitional government. 
He is the author of the draft Law on Religious Communities 
and Head of the Institute for the Law of Human Rights. 
 
-- Mr. Janez Drobnic [NSi], nominated as Minister of Labor, 
Family and Social Affairs, was the former head of the NSi 
Deputy group in parliament.  Before being elected MP in 
2000, he was employed in the Ministry of Labor as an 
advisor.  He strongly opposed the LDS initiative to legalize 
bio-medical help in insemination of single women and also 
the Law on Decriminalization of Prostitution. 
 
-- Dr. Jure Zupan [NSi], nominated as Minister of Higher 
Education, Science and Technology, is a top Slovene 
scientist, specializinged in chemistry and informatics.  He 
initiated the idea of splitting the ministry of Education 
into two ministries. 
 
-- Mr. Janez Podobnik [SLS], nominated for Minister of 
Environment and Spatial Planning, is president of SLS and 
former president of the National Assembly ([1996 - 2000)]. 
Recently, he was involved in the incident on the Slovene - 
Croatian border where he was roughly arrested by the 
Croatian police for refusing to show his identity card. 
 
-- Mr. Janez Bozic [SLS], nominated as the Minister of 
Transport, is currently the President of the Direction for 
Highways of the Republic of Slovenia (DARS). 
 
-- Mr. Karl Erjavec [DeSUS], nominated as Minister of 
Defense, is currently a State Secretary at the Ministry of 
Justice.  He took his current position as a member of SLS in 
2000, when Ivo Bizjak [SLS] became the minister.(Grega - 
when/why did he switch parties?).  In April 2004 when SLS 
left the coalition, newly appointed MoJ Zdenka Cerar wanted 
him to stay in the position and so he leaft the party. 
After few months he joined DeSUS. 
 
-- Ms. Darinka Mravljak [SLS], nominated as Minister without 
portfolio in charge of Regional Development and Local Self- 
government, is a former Head of the Parliamentarian 
Commission for the Policy of Equal Opportunities. 
 
------------ 
CONFIRMATION 
------------ 
 
3.  (U) The next steps in establishing the GOS is as 
follows:are a few remaining steps before the government can 
be confirmed.  fFirst, the candidates will must have 
hearings in front ofwith the respective parliamentary 
committees within three to seven days after nomination. 
NextThen, the presidents of the committees give their 
opinions to the Prime Minister within 48 hours after the 
hearing.  He then has three days to replace any candidate if 
he pleases.  And finally, Ffollowing this timeline, the 
government might be confirmed by the parliament in an urgent 
session as early as Tuesday, November 30, but more likely, 
it will be be confirmed most likely confirmed on Thursday, 
December 2, 2004 during the regular parliamentary session. 
 
-------------- 
CODE OF ETHICS 
-------------- 
 
4.  (U) When Jansa was elected for the PMPrime Minister in 
the National Assembly, he stated he would demand thea Codex 
of Ethics offor the Government of Slovenia to be signed by 
each member of the government.  It is also a part of the 
coalition agreement.  The Code of Ethics basically talks 
aboutis based on  ffundamental values of human life and 
dignity, freedom, honesty, solidarity and patriotism.  The 
signatureSigning of the code will bind ministers morally and 
ethically to perform their functions according to the laws 
([not using professional information infor personal 
benefitsgain, refusinging of gifts, refusing privileges 
offered duesolely because of to their functionspositions, 
avoiding the conflicts of interest etc.s.)].  Should abuse 
of office come to light in a manner which would be damaging 
to the reputation or work of the Government, individuals In 
case of any of abuses of office that would harm the respect 
of GoS or the work of government, all signatories are 
obliged themselves to offer their resignations to the Prime 
Minister. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
5.  (U) COMMENT:  It is very likely Slovenia will gethave 
its new government by the end of next week [December 3]. 
The coalition holds 49 votes plus two representatives of 
minorities that usually stick with the coalition.  There are 
maybe two potentially controversial candidates for the 
ministers.  The Ffirst one is proposed (and former) FoMin 
Dimitrij Rupel who was dismissed from the ministerial 
positionas Foreign Minister in June 2004 for his active 
participatingon in the Assembly for the Republic, thatwhich 
joinedaligned itself with politicalcenter- right parties 
beforeprior to national elections.  In that regard he 
switched parties just before elections and thus got another 
chance to be the minister.As reported previously, Rupel 
quickly allied himself with Jansa and the SDS and has 
secured himself his old job in the new government.  His 
former party [LDS] will definitelycertainly oppose him in 
the Foreign Affairs Committee review and most likely the 
rest of the opposition [ZLSD and SNS] won\'t support him 
either will withhold support.  ButHowever, the fact is 
thatparliamentary committees only give advisory opinions on 
each candidates, thatwhich the Prime Minister is not 
obligatoryobliged to follow it. 
 
6. The second controversial and probablyperhaps even more 
problematic candidate facing confirmation is Dragutin Mate 
for the Minister of Interior.  He has been close to Jansa 
since Jansa became the Minister of Defense in 1990.  During 
Mate\'s employment in the Ministry of Defense     ([Defense 
Intelligence Office, Personnel Office) and as the Defense 
Attach in Sarajevo he gotwas involved in several affairs 
that might be reopened during his hearing in the Committee 
for the Defense hearing.  In preparation for Mate\'s hearing, 
Ssome LDS deputies alreadyhave demanded from the president 
of the National Assembly to providethe reports of the 
Commission ([fromin the previous composition of the 
parliament)] that investigated the weapons tradeing during 
the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, so they can prepare for 
the hearing. 
 
7.  The two mentionedRupel and Mate are likely the only two 
candidates thatwho will face intense questioning would sweat 
the most during their the hearings.  At but at the end of 
the day, however, the parliament votes on the teamentire 
slate of ministers as a whole package.   and iWith only 46 
votes needed for confirmation of the team, Jansa\'s 
coalition, which controls 49 votes, is expected to approve 
the proposed cabinet.t is expected the coalition will 
support it.  They only need 46 votes and that has been 
already assured.  END COMMENT. 
 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"23346","11/29/2004 2:50","04LJUBLJANA1071","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 001071 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, ECON, SI 
SUBJECT: JANSA SELECTS HIS CABINET 
 
1.  (U) SUMMARY:  On Wednesday afternoon, November 24, after 
the signing of a coalition agreement by all four presidents 
of the coalition parties, Prime Minister Janez Jansa sent a 
list of 16 proposed ministerial candidates to the National 
Assembly for approval.  The National Assembly has seven days 
(until November 30) to approve the entire slate.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (U) The list of candidates with brief biographical 
information is as follows: 
 
-- Dr. Dimitrij Rupel (SDS), nominated for Minister of 
Foreign Affairs, was foreign minister from 2000 - 2004 (and 
previously 1990-1993), Slovene Ambassador to US (1997-2000), 
and Mayor of Ljubljana (1995-1997).  He was dismissed as 
FoMin just before national elections in June of 2004.  He 
then left the Liberal Democratic Party to join Slovene 
Democratic Party deputy group and run for Parliament.  He 
was also one of the creators of the Assembly for the 
Republic.  (Note: during elections, Rupel was listed as an 
\"independent\" on the SDS list.  However, in recent press, he 
has been identified as a member of SDS, and Rupel has not 
made a point of disagreeing with this characterization.) 
 
-- Dr. Gregor Virant [not affiliated but close to Jansa\'s 
SDS party] nominated as Minister for Public Administration, 
a newly established ministry under Jansa\'s government. 
Virant was a former State Secretary at the Ministry of 
Interior in charge of Public Administration reform, and 
creator of the Ministry of Public Administration.  He was 
also a member of Jansa\'s Expert Council. 
 
-- Dr. Vasko Simoniti [SDS], nominated as Minister of 
Culture, is a professor of History at the Philosophy Faculty 
at the University of Ljubljana.  He was head of the 
presidential election campaign in 2002 for independent 
candidate Barbara Brezigar [supported by SDS and NSi]. 
 
-- Mr. Andrej Vizjak [SDS], nominated as Minister of 
Economy, is currently the mayor of Brezice and a member of 
parliament.  His main goals as minister will be reforming 
government regulation of business, especially with respect 
to administrative barriers and taxation. 
 
-- Mr. Andrej Brucan [SDS], nominated as Minister of Health, 
is vice-president of SDS and was the Minister of Health 
during Bajuk\'s government (2000). Since 1979 he has headed 
the Urgent Internal Medical Office of the Clinical Center in 
Ljubljana. 
 
-- Dr. Milan Zver, [SDS] nominated as Minister of Education, 
is the President of the SDS Council and a professor of 
Sociology at Maribor University.  He supports the idea of 
Bible study as an optional subject in primary school. 
 
-- Mr. Dragutin Mate, [SDS] nominated as Minister of 
Interior is employed in the Ministry of Defense as Director 
of the Directorate for Defense.  He became known to the 
public as the Slovene Defense Attach in Sarajevo [from 1996 
to 1999] where he was reportedly collecting information on 
Slovene Ambassador Mirosic\'s private life.  He was recalled 
early from his posting.  Mate also testified in front of the 
Parliamentary Commission on post-independence weapons trade. 
 
-- Ms. Marija Lukacic, nominated for Minister of 
Agriculture, Forestry and Food and proposed by SDS (though 
not a party member), was the former Director of the Fund of 
Agricultural Land and Forests [1994 - 1999] where she was 
not very successful.  In 2000 she was nominated for the 
Director of the Office for Denationalization and in 2001 she 
returned to the Ministry of Agriculture to head the Office 
for Natural Disasters. 
 
-- Dr. Andrej Bajuk,[Nsi] nominated as Minister of Finance, 
is the president of NSi and a former prime minister 
[transitional government in 2000].  Bajuk worked for the 
Interamerican Development Bank in various positions from 
1977-2000.  He strongly supports privatization in Slovenia, 
especially of banks, however he has indicated that the banks 
should stay in Slovene hands. 
 
-- Dr. Lovro Sturm, [Nsi] nominated as Minister of Justice, 
is a professor of law at Ljubljana University.  He is a 
former Constitutional Court Judge and was Minister of 
Education in 2000 during Bajuk\'s transitional government. 
He is the author of the draft Law on Religious Communities 
and Head of the Institute for the Law of Human Rights. 
 
-- Mr. Janez Drobnic [NSi], nominated as Minister of Labor, 
 
Family and Social Affairs, was the former head of the NSi 
Deputy group in parliament.  Before being elected MP in 
2000, he was employed in the Ministry of Labor as an 
advisor.  He strongly opposed the LDS initiative to legalize 
bio-medical help in insemination of single women and also 
the Law on Decriminalization of Prostitution. 
 
-- Dr. Jure Zupan [NSi], nominated as Minister of Higher 
Education, Science and Technology, is a top Slovene 
scientist, specializing in chemistry and informatics.  He 
initiated the idea of splitting the ministry of Education 
into two ministries. 
 
-- Mr. Janez Podobnik [SLS], nominated for Minister of 
Environment and Spatial Planning, is president of SLS and 
former president of the National Assembly (1996 - 2000). 
Recently, he was involved in the incident on the Slovene - 
Croatian border where he was roughly arrested by the 
Croatian police for refusing to show his identity card. 
 
-- Mr. Janez Bozic [SLS], nominated as the Minister of 
Transport, is currently the President of the Direction for 
Highways of the Republic of Slovenia (DARS). 
 
-- Mr. Karl Erjavec [DeSUS], nominated as Minister of 
Defense, is currently a State Secretary at the Ministry of 
Justice.  He took his current position as a member of SLS in 
2000, when Ivo Bizjak [SLS] became the minister.  In April 
2004 when SLS left the coalition, newly appointed MoJ Zdenka 
Cerar wanted him to stay in the position and so he left the 
party.  After few months he joined DeSUS. 
 
-- Ms. Darinka Mravljak [SLS], nominated as Minister without 
portfolio in charge of Regional Development and Local Self- 
government, is a former Head of the Parliamentarian 
Commission for the Policy of Equal Opportunities. 
 
------------ 
CONFIRMATION 
------------ 
 
3.  (U) The are a few remaining steps before the government 
can be confirmed.  First, the candidates must have hearings 
with the respective parliamentary committees within three to 
seven days after nomination.  Then, the presidents of the 
committees give their opinions to the Prime Minister within 
48 hours after the hearing.  He then has three days to 
replace any candidate if he pleases.  And finally, following 
this timeline, the government will be confirmed most likely 
on Thursday, December 2, 2004 during the regular 
parliamentary session. 
 
-------------- 
CODE OF ETHICS 
-------------- 
 
4.  (U) When Jansa was elected Prime Minister in the 
National Assembly, he stated he would demand a Code of 
Ethics for the Government of Slovenia to be signed by each 
member of the government.  It is also a part of the 
coalition agreement.  The Code of Ethics is based on 
fundamental values of human life and dignity, freedom, 
honesty, solidarity and patriotism.  Signing the code will 
bind ministers morally and ethically to perform their 
functions according to the law (not using professional 
information for personal gain, refusing gifts, refusing 
privileges offered solely because of their positions, 
avoiding conflicts of interest etc.).  Should abuse of 
office come to light in a manner which would be damaging to 
the reputation or work of the Government, individuals  are 
obliged to offer their resignations to the Prime Minister. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
5.  It is very likely Slovenia will have its new government 
by the end of next week [December 3].  The coalition holds 
49 votes plus two representatives of minorities that usually 
stick with the coalition.  There are two potentially 
controversial candidates for minister.  The first is 
proposed (and former) FoMin Dimitrij Rupel who was dismissed 
as Foreign Minister in June 2004 for his active 
participation in the Assembly for the Republic, which 
aligned itself with center-right parties prior to national 
elections.  As reported previously, Rupel quickly allied 
himself with Jansa and the SDS and has secured himself his 
old job in the new government.  His former party [LDS] will 
certainly oppose him in the Foreign Affairs Committee review 
 
and most likely the rest of the opposition [ZLSD and SNS] 
will withhold support.  However, parliamentary committees 
only give advisory opinions on candidates, which the Prime 
Minister is not obliged to follow. 
 
6. The second controversial and perhaps even more 
problematic candidate facing confirmation is Dragutin Mate 
for Minister of Interior.  He has been close to Jansa since 
Jansa became the Minister of Defense in 1990.  During Mate\'s 
employment in the Ministry of Defense (Defense Intelligence 
Office, Personnel Office) and as the Defense Attach in 
Sarajevo he was involved in several affairs that might be 
reopened during his hearing.  In preparation for Mate\'s 
hearing, some LDS deputies have the reports of the 
Commission (in the previous parliament) that investigated 
weapons trade during the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, . 
 
7.  Rupel and Mate are likely the only two candidates who 
will face intense questioning during their hearings.  At the 
end of the day, however, the parliament votes on the entire 
slate of ministers as a package.  With only 46 votes needed 
for confirmation of the team, Jansa\'s coalition, which 
controls 49 votes, is expected to approve the proposed 
cabinet. 
 
 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"23419","11/30/2004 11:41","04LJUBLJANA1079","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SECSTATE252711","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS LJUBLJANA 001079 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, IZ, SI 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA ON OSCE ELECTION OBSERVERS FOR IRAQ 
 
REF: SECSTATE 252711 
 
1. (SBU)  Pol/Econ chief raised the points in reftel with 
Blanka Jamnisek of the OSCE task force.  Though points had 
been provided in advance of the meeting, Jamnisek apologized 
for being unprepared to respond to the demarche. In addition 
to preparing for the OSCE ministerial this weekend, the 
Slovene MFA is preparing for the return of Dimitrij Rupel as 
Foreign Minister on Friday. 
 
2.  (SBU)  With some prodding, Jamnisek allowed that if there 
were a consensus behind the idea of OSCE election observers 
in Iraq, as CiO, Slovenia would be prepared to see it 
implemented.  She was not able to offer a GOS opinion on the 
plan, however. 
 
3.  (SBU) Comment:  In this conversation, as in many previous 
discussions, Jamnisek (and her colleagues) expressed the view 
that Slovenia would be taking on the role of \"mediator\" in 
the OSCE.  While the Task Force has described several 
initiatives it plans to introduce as CiO, it has been much 
less forthcoming with clear support or lack of support for 
specific proposals.  Perhaps with the arrival of Rupel at the 
end of this week, and thus the end of uncertainty about 
leadership of the MFA, Jamnisek and colleagues will be able 
to sharpen their views on OSCE issues and provide leadership 
as well.  End Comment. 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"23420","11/30/2004 11:46","04LJUBLJANA1080","Embassy Ljubljana","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE254097","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L LJUBLJANA 001080 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/30/2014 
TAGS: KAWC, PREL, PGOV, ICTY 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA FIRM ON MAINTAINING ICTY CONDITIONALITY 
ON CROATIA 
 
REF: STATE 254097 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Thomas B. Robertson, Reasons 
1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
1.  (C)  Pol/Econ Chief delivered reftel points to the Head 
of the Western Balkans Department at the MFA, Peter Reberc. 
Reberc is recently returned from eight years in Rome first at 
the Slovene Mission to the Holy See and then the bilateral 
Mission.  He explained that the Government of Slovenia is 
very concerned about the poor precedent that would be set in 
the region if Croatia were not held firmly to the ICTY 
conditionality prior to opening negotiations with the EU.  It 
was his personal view that once negotiations opened, a great 
deal of leverage on the ICTY issue would be lost.  Reberc 
pledged to share the U.S. view on this issue with State 
Secretary Logar at tomorrow morning\'s CORPRER preparatory 
 
SIPDIS 
meeting. 
 
2.  (C) On Slovenia-Croatia relations in general, Reberc says 
that he has been fighting an uphill battle in his two months 
on the job.  He hopes that with the return of Dimitrij Rupel 
to the Foreign Ministry, he will be able to weed out the 
emotional \"public psychosis\" from the real political issues 
with Croatia.  In his view, Slovenia should be presenting a 
more positive, forward-looking face to Croatia than has been 
the recent case. 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"23455","12/1/2004 3:15","04LJUBLJANA1081","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED","04REFTEL:STATE251625","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS LJUBLJANA 001081 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE, EUR/ERA, EB 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO USTR/ERRION 
USDOC FOR ITA/SAVICH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, ETRD, SI, USTR 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA ON REPEAL OF FSC/ETI 
 
REFTEL: STATE 251625 
 
1.  (U) On 30 November Pol/Econ chief met with Dimitrij 
Grcar, State Undersecretary for Multilateral Affairs at 
the Ministry of Economy to present reftel points on 
repeal of FSC/ETI.  Grcar knows the case well and 
explained that Slovenia considers it resolved.  He was 
not aware of the latest European Commission position 
but said he would investigate - commenting that he is 
often baffled as to what motivates Brussels on some 
issues. 
 
2.  (U) Grcar took a pragmatic view of the issue.  He 
believes a transition period as such is not necessarily 
an obstacle to closing the WTO dispute, and he is 
strongly in favor of considering this case resolved and 
moving it off the table. 
 
 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"23574","12/3/2004 12:22","04LJUBLJANA1088","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 001088 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/NCE TRIM AND NP/ECC MCCLELLAN 
CBP/INA FOR WLAWRENCE 
VIENNA FOR ICE ATTACHE 
ZAGREB FOR JFRIEDMAN 
USDOE/NNSA FOR TPERRY 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: ETTC, MNUC, PARM, PREL, KSTC, KNNP, HR, SI 
SUBJECT: EXBS: SLOVENIA AND CROATIA PROGRAM ADVISOR MONTHLY 
REPORTING CABLE-NOVEMBER 2004 
 
 
1.  SUMMARY: Passports were received from Slovenia and visas 
granted for the Washington Department of Commerce (DOC) 
workshop in December.  Three members of the Slovenian 
Government and three from Croatia attended the London Export 
Conference.  The University of Georgia (UGA) conducted a 
Slovenian export assessment.  Two National Control List 
workshops and Seaport training were conducted in Croatia. 
Shield America (ICP) training was conducted in Ljubljana. 
Discussions continue regarding the formation of a newly 
created Croatian Coast Guard. 
 
Slovenia 
 
I.  BROAD ITEMS OF INTEREST TO ADVISORS AND AGENCY MANAGERS 
 
A.  None 
 
II. COMPLETED ACTIONS FOR THE REPORTING PERIOD. 
 
A.  SITE ASSESSMENTS AND MEETINGS DURING THE REPORTING 
PERIOD. 
1.  The University of Georgia conducted an assessment of 
EXBS in Slovenia during November 1-6, 2004.  The initial 
feedback from the personnel conducting this assessment was 
quite positive.  There has been definite and measurable 
progress within Slovenia. 
 
2.  Visas were issued and final travel arrangements were 
made for the eight senior Slovenian officials traveling to 
Washington for the Department of Commerce International 
Visitors Program. This program will take place in Washington 
from December 6 to 10, 2004. 
 
3.  Three senior Slovenian officials attended the London 
Export Conference November 8-10, 2004 and reported that they 
considered it a valuable forum. 
 
4.  On November 3, meeting was held with the Slovenian 
Nuclear Safety Administration.  Efforts are underway to 
locate all sources of ionizing radiation in Slovenia that 
may have been lost during the transition to independence. 
Several significant sources have been recovered in the last 
few months and it is hoped that all significant sources will 
be located within the next six months. 
 
5.  Meetings were also held with the Chamber of Commerce 
(Defense Industry Association), Customs and Police regarding 
the impact of adoption of the European Commission Control 
List.  Military use items appear to be well controlled, but 
licensing for dual use items is still in a learning mode. 
More companies appear to have the ability to produce dual 
use items then had originally been thought. 
 
6.  On November 30, a Law Enforcement reception was held at 
the Ambassadors residence in Ljubljana.  The purpose of the 
reception was to honor graduates of a recent ILEA course in 
Budapest.  Most EXBS Law Enforcement contacts were present. 
 
B.  TRAINING CONDUCTED DURING THE REPORTING PERIOD. 
 
1.  Shield America (ICP) training was held in Ljubljana 
November 16-18, 2004.  The workshop was well received by the 
participants. 
 
EQUIPMENT DELIEVERD DURING THE TRAINING PERIOD. 
 
1. None. 
 
IMMINENT TRAINING OR EQUIPMENT STATUS UPDATE. 
 
1.  None. 
 
SIGNIFICANT DEVELOPMENTS IN EXPORT CONTROLS, NON 
PROLIFERATION, OR RELATED BORDER SECURITY. 
 
1.  None. 
 
III. RED FLAG ISSUES. 
 
1.  The movement of the EXBS office from Ljubljana to Zagreb 
requires the initiation of an NSDD-38.  Neither Embassy may 
 
 
proceed without this.  Leases in Ljubljana expire by the end 
of June 2005.  To avoid multiple ICASS charges, which can be 
significant, each Embassy requires six months notice.  The 
NSDD-38 request is required to start the six month clock 
ticking. 
 
CROATIA 
 
I.  BROAD ITEMS OF INTEREST TO ADVISORS AND AGENCY MANAGERS. 
 
A.  None. 
 
II.  COMPLETED ACTIONS FOR THE REPORTING PERIOD. 
 
A.  SITE ASSESSMENTS AND MEETINGS DURING REPORTING PERIOD. 
 
1.  The Zagreb Donors group met for their monthly meeting on 
November 23.  This was the EXBS Advisor\'s first meeting with 
this group, which is hosted by the OSCE.  Several people 
were present that are normally included in EXBS projects and 
it is anticipated that the EXBS Advisor will continue to 
attend these meetings.  A primary focus of the Croatian 
government is entrance into the European Union and many of 
the donor groups are associated with the European Union. 
Close contact between EXBS and these other donor groups is 
essential, not only to preclude duplication of effort, but 
also to insure that EXBS efforts not conflict with EU and 
Croatian goals regarding EU entrance for Croatia. 
 
2.  Further meetings were held with the Croatian Border 
Police regarding requests for assistance with the formation 
of the new Croatian Coast Guard.  The EXBS Advisor will be 
in Washington in January and will discuss these concerns. 
Additionally, a meeting was held with Colonel Roman Mikulic 
regarding the eventual outcome of which agency will actually 
have the new Coast Guard.  It was the Colonel\'s belief that 
it would be a shared service, using naval vessels, for 
several years, but eventually would be solely civilian under 
the Ministry of Interior Police. 
 
3.  Three senior Croatian officials attended the November 
London Export Conference, but there as yet has been no 
feedback from them to EXBS. 
 
B.  TRAINING CONDUCTED DURING THE REPORTING PERIOD. 
 
1. November 7-12, Seaport training was held for the Croatian 
Customs and Police in Opatija and Rijeka, Croatia.  The 
training was very popular with the attendance of 31 people; 
six more then had originally been anticipated.  The Rijeka 
Customs equivalent of a CBP Contraband Enforcement Team was 
so professional that the U.S. instructors recommend that 
they attend advanced training in Newark, New Jersey. 
 
2.  A National Control List (NCL) training session for 
government licensing officials was held in Zagreb November 
15-18.  The training was well attended and addressed many 
concerns held by the officials anticipating the January 1, 
2005, implementation of the Croatian NCL. 
 
3.  An NCL course for industry was held November 29-30 in 
Zagreb.  This course was also well attended and the 
participation of the attendees was particularly 
enthusiastic.  Based on the number of questions regarding 
what companies will have to comply with the new law and how 
to do so, it is anticipated that there will be requests for 
additional courses after the law takes effect January 1, 
2005. 
 
C.  EQUIPMENT DELIVERED DURING THE REPORTING PERIOD. 
 
1.  Six CT-30 kits containing fiber-optic scopes and density 
meters were delivered to the Croatian Customs Service at the 
conclusion of the training held in Opatija-Rijeka November 
12, 2004. 
 
D.  IMMINENT TRAINING OR EQUIPMENT STATUS UPDATE. 
 
1.  December 14-17, 2004.  Targeting and Risk Management to 
be held in Zagreb. 
 
 
2.   January 17-19, 2005.  PASS (Passive Acoustic Signature 
System) training to be held in Zagreb. 
 
E.  SIGNIFICANT DEVELOPMENTS IN EXPORT CONTROLS, NON 
PROLIFERATION, OR RELATED BORDER SECURITY. 
 
1.  None. 
 
III. RED FLAG ITEMS. 
 
1.  The same concerns listed in the Slovenian Red Flag 
Issues, regarding the transfer of the EXBS office from 
Slovenia to Croatia. 
 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"23624","12/6/2004 6:29","04LJUBLJANA1089","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 001089 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, SI, OSCE 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: NEW GOS CABINET CONFIRMED BY PARLIAMENT 
 
1.  (U) SUMMARY:  In a 51:37 public vote on 03 December, the 
National Assembly confirmed the proposed cabinet of PM Janez 
Jansa.  MPs from Jansa\'s four-party coalition plus the two 
national minority representatives supported the slate of 15 
candidates.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (U) Exactly two months after elections the Slovenian 
National Assembly confirmed the new GoS cabinet.  With just 
one \"up-or-down\" vote for the entire package, the Parliament 
voted in Jansa\'s slate of 15 ministers-designate.  All 49 
members of the governing coalition parties (SDS, NSi, SLS, 
DeSUS) and the two MPs who represent the Hungarian and 
Italian national minorities voted for the cabinet.  Thirty- 
seven opposition party MPs (from LDS, ZLSD, and SNS) voted 
against, with two abstentions. 
 
3.  (U) While Jansa\'s original proposal included 16 
candidates, Minister-Designate without Portfolio for Local 
Self-Government and Regional Development Ms. Darinka 
Mravljak (SLS) resigned after difficulties in committee 
hearings.  She explained she was withdrawing for \"personal 
reasons.\"  By law Jansa has three months to fill the slot; 
however, SLS has said it will propose a replacement for 
Mravljak by 13 December, with a vote expected to follow by 
the end of December 
 
4.  (U) The new ministers and their main priorties, as 
presented during their parliamentary comittee hearings, are 
as follows: 
 
-- Dr. Andre Bajuk (NSi), Minister of Finance.  His 
prioritis are: registering state and municipal property and 
state obligations and claims; reforming the currnt state 
accounting system; analyzing effectivenss of state property 
management. 
 
-- Dr. Dimitij Rupel (SDS), Minister of Foreign Affairs. 
Hispriorities are:  Slovenia\'s 2005 Chairmanship-in-Office 
of the OSCE; Slovenia\'s 2008 presidency of the EU; enhancing 
relations with Croatia (including avoidance of future 
conflicts); strengthening relations with U.S. 
 
-- Dr. Gregor Virant (not affiliated but close to Jansa\'s 
SDS party) Minister for Public Administration, a newly 
established ministry under Jansa\'s government.  His main 
priorities are:  breaking down administrative barriers for 
Slovenian citizens; combating the arrogance of public 
servants; transparency in public administration. 
 
-- Mr. Dragutin Mate, Minister of Interior (no party 
affiliation, but close to Jansa since Slovenia became 
independent).  His priorities are:  improving prosecution of 
white-collar crimes; improving training opportunities for 
the police; improving internal relations at the ministry and 
relations between the police and local communities. 
 
-- Mr. Karl Erjavec (DeSUS), Minister of Defense.  His 
priorities are:  ensuring top physical condition of 
soldiers; assuring enough financial resources for purchasing 
equipment and weapons between 2008-2012 through basic 
development funds; adoption of the status law on the 
military; selling disposable real estate worth SIT 6 billion 
(approx. USD 335,000); decreasing the number of 
administrative employees in the ministry. 
 
-- Dr. Lovro Sturm (NSi), Minister of Justice.  His 
priorities are:  improving the operation of the judicial 
system to decrease court backlogs; adoption of the Law on 
Religious Freedom and Religious Communities. 
 
-- Dr. Vasko Simoniti (SDS), the Minister of Culture.  His 
main priorities are:  increasing the share of state money 
for culture; protection of the Slovene language; increasing 
visibility of Slovenian culture abroad. 
 
-- Mr. Andrej Vizjak (SDS), Minister of Economy.  His main 
priorities are:  assuring fair competition before selling 
state monopolies; greatly increasing budget share for 
tourism; privatizing Slovenian ironworks. 
 
-- Mr. Andrej Brucan (SDS), Minister of Health.  His 
priorities are:  settling the `agony\' surrounding the 
purchase of radiation devices for Oncological Institute; 
adoption of the Law on Equalization Schemes to prevent 
social inequities; larger involvement of private but 
monitored capital in health; and increasing taxes on alcohol 
 
and cigarettes. 
 
-- Dr. Milan Zver (SDS), Minister of Education and Sport. 
His priorities are:  increasing the percentage of children 
who attend kindergarten; more private kindergartens; 
improving personnel and infrastructure in schools; 
decreasing stress of pupils while maintaining high 
standards; improving the quality of knowledge; more autonomy 
for teachers; cheaper textbooks. 
 
-- Ms. Marija Lukacic (not affiliated, but close to SDS), 
Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Food. Her priorities 
are:  educating farmers; further developing a comprehensive 
land policy. 
 
-- Mr. Janez Drobnic (NSi), Minister of Labor, Family and 
Social Affairs.  His priorities are:  adoption of the Law on 
Collective Bargaining; decreasing regional differences in 
unemployment; increasing employment levels, especially among 
disabled and older workers. 
 
-- Dr. Jure Zupan (NSi), Minister of Higher Education, 
Science and Technology.  His priorities are:  rejuvenating 
and improving university personnel; settling the problems 
with continuing education; increasing resources for 
research. 
 
-- Mr. Janez Podobnik (SLS), Minister of Environment and 
Spatial Planning.  His priorities are:  constructing one or 
two incinerators for waste; supporting `green\' energy; 
increasing availability of apartments for younger and 
married people. 
 
-- Mr. Janez Bozic (SLS), Minister of Transport.  His 
priorities are:  using traffic policy to improve Slovenia\'s 
highway network; construction of a second railway track 
between Divaca and Koper. 
 
5.  (SBU) COMMENT:  The vote on the cabinet went exactly as 
expected.  What remains to be seen is how enduring the 
governing coalition will be, with SLS having a history of 
switching sides at opportune moments and with DeSUS party 
leader Anton Rous reportedly taking cues from former 
President Milan Kucan for the time being.  Nonetheless, 
Jansa has managed perhaps the most efficient change of 
government after an election since Slovenia became 
independent.  This purposeful efficiency was demonstrated by 
the immediate swearing in of Rupel, who assumed office right 
away in order to travel to the OSCE ministerial on 04 
December in Sofia.  The remaining cabinet members will 
assume office during the week of 06 December.  END COMMENT. 
 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"23632","12/6/2004 8:57","04LJUBLJANA1090","Embassy Ljubljana","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L  LJUBLJANA 001090 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE EUR/RPM 
SOFIA PLEASE PASS TO USOSCE DELEGATION 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/04/2014 
TAGS: PREL, SI, OSCE 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR CALLS ON NEW (AGAIN) SLOVENE FOREIGN 
MINISTER, DIMITRIJ RUPEL 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Thomas B. Robertson Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
1.  (C)  Summary.  Ambassador met with Foreign Minister 
Dimitrij Rupel on Dec. 4 prior to the minister\'s departure 
for the OSCE Ministerial in Sofia.  Rupel appeared relaxed 
and very comfortable in his surroundings, which he had 
vacated less than six months ago.  Rupel said he was looking 
forward to meeting the Secretary and looked forward to 
renewing his acquaintance with Dr. Rice. The discussion 
focused heavily on OSCE issues, particularly selection of the 
next Secretary General, scales of contribution, and 
monitoring the next round of elections in Ukraine.  Rupel 
again described Slovenia\'s approach to the job as one of 
mediator and consensus builder explaining that, as CiO, 
Slovenia will have to answer to 56 countries and cannot take 
sides.  Rupel and the Ambassador also discussed Iraq and the 
idea of debt forgiveness, radiation detection monitors 
(portals), Embassy security and the ongoing Western Wireless 
dispute. End Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
NO CLOUDS ON THE HORIZON 
------------------------ 
 
2.  (C) After a late evening parliamentary confirmation of 
new Prime Minister Janez Jansa\'s cabinet on December 3, 
Foreign Minister Dimitrij Rupel, returning to his job after a 
six month hiatus, received Ambassador Robertson at the 
ministry on Saturday afternoon, December 4.  Rupel was 
planning to leave for Sofia on Sunday.   It was clear that 
the upcoming OSCE ministerial was on his mind as Rupel 
launched almost immediately into the OSCE issues of concern 
he would be bringing with him to Sofia. He then backed up to 
address some bilateral issues.  Rupel was upbeat and thought 
there \"were no clouds on the horizon of our bilateral 
relationship.\"  He expressed his desire to further improve 
Slovenia - U.S. relations, which he thinks are already good 
but have room to develop.   When in his Parliamentary 
hearings, Rupel was asked what he meant by strengthening ties 
with the U.S. and he explained that he wanted to see more 
U.S. investment in Slovenia, cooperate with the U.S. in the 
OSCE and other multilateral organizations since we share 
common values and work toward the same goals.  Rupel raised 
the issue of the Western Wireless claim, and was a little 
surprised when the Ambassador pointed out that next Friday, 
December 10, was the end of the 45 day grace period Western 
Wireless had set before filing a law suit against the 
government.  Rupel gave every indication that he and the GOS 
would want to settle this case somehow and to avoid becoming 
party to a large lawsuit.  The Ambassador mentioned the 
possibility of flexibility on the part of Western Wireless if 
it was convinced the new GOS was moving in good faith to 
respond to its complaints.  Rupel seemed to take this on 
board. 
 
------- 
PORTALS 
------- 
 
3. (U)  Pitching it as an OSCE as well as a bilateral 
interest, the Ambassador raised with Rupel the ongoing delay 
of receiving comments on the implementing agreement which 
would allow the process of installation of the radiation 
detection monitors (portals) in the Port of Koper.  Rupel 
seemed well briefed on the problem and knew the ball was now 
in the  Ministry of Finance\'s court.  He promised to see what 
pressure he could bring to bear and to move the process 
forward. 
 
----------- 
TABULA RASA 
----------- 
 
4.  (C)  Rupel dearly wants to have some of the stickier 
issues of the current CiO of the OSCE cleared from the slate 
before taking over in January.  He mentioned that he was 
aware the U.S. was supporting the French candidate for 
Secretary General of the OSCE - whom Slovenia also supports, 
 
SIPDIS 
but he also thought there might be another potential 
U.S.-backed candidate in the wings.  Rupel does not want the 
scales of contribution problem to spill over into his tenure 
and wanted to know more about the U.S. position on this 
issue.  Rupel also expressed some mystification about some of 
the discussions surrounding the title of an upcoming seminar 
 
 
on Anti-Semitism. 
 
 
------------------- 
ALL EYES ON UKRAINE 
------------------- 
 
5.  (C)  On the topic of Ukraine, Rupel expounded a bit on 
his theory of democracy lapping at the shores of Ukraine and 
Russia, and how this was a frightening prospect for many in 
those countries.  Even as he expressed support for monitors 
in the next round of Ukraine elections, he seemed skeptical 
that the OSCE an others would be able to cover the country 
adequately.  He hopes also to see this problem in the 
\"solved\" column before he is sworn in on January 16, 2005. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
EARLY VISIT TO WASHINGTON/SUPPORT ON IRAQ 
----------------------------------------- 
 
6.  (C)  As has been mentioned in previous cables and heard 
from the Slovene embassy in Washington, Rupel is pushing hard 
to visit the U.S. early in 2005, and he would like to have 
his Prime Minister lead the delegation.  Responding to this 
request, the Ambassador suggested that further cooperation in 
Iraq and Afghanistan would be welcome news in Washington and 
the commitment of 50, 000 euros (recently deposited in the UN 
Trust Fund) to U.N. protection forces was a good signal.  The 
Ambassador also broached the idea of Iraq debt relief and 
Rupel responded that he thought the GOS was prepared to 
forgive any Iraq debt - but he would need to double check  It 
is a little more complicated for Slovenia than others because 
the debt is old Yugoslav debt and involves succession 
agreements.  He thought that if it had not already been 
worked out, it could be. 
 
---------------- 
EMBASSY SECURITY 
---------------- 
 
6.  (SBU)  The Ambassador again requested high-level 
attention to U.S. Embassy security issues.  He explained that 
the Ministry of Interior, which supervises all police 
services in Slovenia, and the City of Ljubljana need to come 
to agreement on restricting access to Tomsiceva street next 
to the Embassy.  Rupel suggested he would call the Mayor and 
discuss the issue with the Prime Minister.  He is interested 
in meeting this urgent embassy need. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
7.  (C)  Rupel appears to have stepped back into his office 
without missing a beat.  As reported earlier, we expect 
already good bilateral relations will only improve, and for 
there to be continuity on the OSCE account.  Rupel did not 
present any new or different ideas from his predecessor in 
this meeting.  Rupel is a true trans-Atlanticist and, working 
with PM Jansa, he should have fewer difficulties inside the 
Cabinet getting his views heard and positions implemented 
than he did in the government of former PM Anton Rop. 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"23691","12/7/2004 8:02","04LJUBLJANA1092","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED","04REFTEL:LJUBLJANA877","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


","UNCLAS LJUBLJANA 001092 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
DEPT FOR CA/VO/F/P (DLOPES DA ROSA); EUR/NCE (VTRIMM); EUR/PPD 
(ARUPPE, FSCHMADEL); AND ECA/PE/V/R/E (KHAVENNER) 
DHS FOR BCBP (CRONIN); USEU FOR POL/PRM (MMEZNAR); ROME AND VIENNA 
FOR DHS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CMGT, PREL, KPAO, SI 
SUBJECT: SLOVENE BIOMETRIC PASSPORT UPDATE 
 
REFTEL:   LJUBLJANA 00877 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY: Slovenia will begin issuing a first-phase 
biometric passport containing photo recognition data before 
October 26, 2005.  A second-phase biometric passport incorporating 
both photo recognition and fingerprints will be introduced at a 
later date, in compliance with new EU requirements.  With the 
introduction of the new biometric passport, Slovenia will also 
introduce new procedures for delivering passports to their owners. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) Fresh back from meeting with officials of other EU member 
states, Slovene contacts said the EU decision on a uniform 
standard for biometric passports has been made and will be 
finalized by mid-January 2005.  The EU standard will mandate two 
biometric identifiers: 1) facial recognition, with a deadline for 
implementation of 18 months from the adoption of the standard, and 
2) fingerprints, with a deadline for implementation of 36 months 
from the date of adoption of the standard. 
 
3. (U) With the EU standard finally set, the Slovene authorities 
see a clear road ahead.  In a meeting December 3 with Conoff, 
State Undersecretaries Bojan Trnovsek of the Ministry of Interior, 
and Vlasta Valencic-Pelikan and Andrej Ster of the MFA\'s Consular 
Department, said they expect to have the new Slovene passport 
completed by June or July 2005 - within the timeframe they had 
predicted earlier (Reftel).  They expect to begin issuing the new 
passport no later than October 26, 2005. 
 
4. (SBU) Trnovsek said the new passport would feature a contact- 
less chip imbedded in the polycarbonate bio-data page.  The chip 
would be loaded with facial recognition data, biographic data, a 
digitized image of the applicant\'s signature, and all necessary 
public infrastructure data.  He said Slovenia would need to adopt 
a new law on passports consistent with data protection 
requirements.  He expects the new legislation will be ready to 
submit to Parliament by late February or early March. 
 
5. (U) By the October 26, 2005 deadline imposed by U.S. law for 
Visa Waiver Program travelers, Slovenia will have transitioned 
completely to issuing only the new biometric passports.  There 
will be no option to apply for a non-biometric passport. 
Additionally, Slovenia will change the way passports are delivered 
to applicants.  Slovene authorities will discontinue delivering 
passports to applicants by post.  Instead, all applicants will be 
required to pick up their passports in person at the 
Administrative Unit in their area.  At the time of pickup the 
authorized official will verify the accuracy of all information 
loaded on the chip with the Interior Ministry\'s centralized 
database, and compare the digitized photo image with the applicant 
in person.  At this time, the applicant too will have the 
opportunity to read and verify the accuracy of information loaded 
on the chip. 
 
6. (U) Trnovsek said Slovenia is in excellent shape to begin 
issuing biometric passports, noting that Slovenia\'s current photo 
standard (600 DPI), which exceeds the ICAO standard (300 DPI), is 
sufficient for facial recognition.  The digitized signature 
currently used in Slovene passports is also suitable for loading 
in a chip, and Slovenia already has a centralized database for 
passport data. 
 
7. (U) In discussing the challenges of incorporating both facial 
recognition and fingerprints in a contact-less chip, Trnovsek and 
Ster said that currently chips of sufficient capacity, quality, 
and reliability are not available in sufficient numbers and at 
reasonable prices.  But they said such chips would undoubtedly be 
available soon.  They also discussed the issue of validity. 
Slovene authorities have yet to decide whether their biometric 
passport will be valid for 10 years (as is the current passport), 
or for less.  They said it is unclear whether chips will last for 
10 years, or that chip manufacturers will guarantee the 
functioning of their products for 10 years. 
 
8. (U) Ster said plans to conduct a pilot study to test the 
biometric passport in real world environments have been dropped 
(REFTEL).  Instead, the passport will be tested under controlled 
conditions before its introduction. 
 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"23885","12/10/2004 9:41","04LJUBLJANA1104","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS LJUBLJANA 001104 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
FOR CA/EX/CSD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCSY, CMGT, AMGT, AADP 
SUBJECT: HARDWARE ACCEPTANCE CABLE FOR CONSULAR EQUIPMENT 
 
REF:  (A) REMEDY #79688/79935, IRF REF #6547, ORDER #38851 
      (B)HARRIS-ORKAND INFORMATION SERVICES (HOIS) EMAIL DATED 
      12/08/04. CURRENT FAX: 386-1-200-5535. PHONE 200-5734. 
      U.S.EMBASSY-LJUBLJANA, PRESERNOVA 31, LJUBLJANA, SLOVENIA 
 
1.  ORDER NUMBER 38851 HAS BEEN INVENTORIED BY POST.  THE SHIPMENT 
IS ACCEPTED. 
 
2. POST APPRECIATES DEPARTMENT\'S ATTENTION TO THIS ISSUE. 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"24014","12/14/2004 7:27","04LJUBLJANA1107","Embassy Ljubljana","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L  LJUBLJANA 001107 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/RPM AND EUR/NCE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/12/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PINR, SI, OSCE, RU 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: FOMIN RUPEL AND USOSCE AMB MINIKES 
DISCUSS OSCE PRIORITIES 
 
 
Classified By: Chief of Mission Thomas B. Robertson for reasons 1.4(b) 
and (d). 
 
1.  (C) SUMMARY:  In a 10 December meeting with COM and 
USOSCE Ambassador Stephan Minikes, FoMin Rupel set out 
Slovenian priorities for its OSCE CiO year, indicating a 
special interest in dealing with issues in Southeastern 
Europe.  Discussion focused on Ukraine and on the need to 
engage the Russians in order to avoid a train wreck within 
the OSCE on its core values and activities.  Minikes urged 
Rupel to play a strong leadership role as CiO.  He suggested 
active early engagement on the Eminent Persons initiative and 
later told MFA OSCE Task Force Head Aleksander Gerzina that 
the U.S. would inform the Slovenes soon of possible U.S. 
candidates.  Minikes told Rupel the U.S. would not support 
the candidacy of either the Swiss or Albanian SecGen 
candidates if the French could not get consensus on their 
candidate, whom the U.S. supports.  Gerzina later replied 
that Slovenia would begin a new search for a SecGen in 
January if no resolution was found in the next few weeks. 
Rupel made a plug for an early visit by PM Janez Jansa to 
Washington, in addition to a visit Rupel would like to make 
by February to see the Secretary.  On scales of contribution, 
Minikes told Rupel the Russian proposal was unacceptable, 
telling Gerzina later that the U.S. could live with Canadian 
or Bulgarian proposals.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (C) On 10 December, COM and USOSCE Ambassador Stephan 
Minikes met with Foreign Minister Dimitrij Rupel to discuss 
the OSCE Ministerial in Sofia and Slovenia\'s priorities for 
its OSCE Chairmanship-in-Office (CiO) in 2005.  Rupel was 
accompanied by MFA OSCE Task Force Director Aleksander 
Gerzina, Task Force Members Simona Leskovar and Rok Srakar, 
Rupel\'s Chef de Cabinet Matej Marn and staffer Masa Siftar. 
COM and Minikes were accompanied by EUR/RPM OSCE Coordinator 
Greta Holtz and Pol-Miloff.  Originally scheduled as a 20 
minute courtesy call, the meeting lasted approximately 75 
minutes as Rupel and Minikes engaged in a lively exchange of 
views.  Minikes later met for a two-hour-plus working lunch 
with Gerzina and eight members of the MFA OSCE Task Force. 
Holtz, Pol/Econ Chief and Pol-Miloff accompanied Minikes to 
the working lunch. 
 
RUPEL: \"PREPARED TO LEAD WITH UTMOST SERIOUSNESS\" 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
3.  (C) Stressing the \"utmost seriousness\" with which 
Slovenia intends to lead the OSCE, Rupel described \"four 
clusters of problems\" the Slovenes saw as priorities: 
Central Asia, the Caucasus, Eastern Europe and Southeastern 
Europe (SEE).  Rupel said Slovenia was \"most interested in 
dealing with problems in the vicinity,\" i.e. SEE, in 
particular Kosovo.  Nonetheless, he noted that other 
high-profile issues such as Ukraine would present challenges 
as well. 
 
4.  (C) Rupel contrasted the relative success at NATO on 
issues including communique language on Ukraine with the 
\"unfortunate confrontation\" with the Russians at the OSCE 
Ministerial on many issues, especially Ukraine.  Quoting 
Russian FoMin Lavrov as saying, \"at NATO we can reach 
compromise and consensus, but at OSCE we cannot,\" Rupel 
pledged to try to correct the problem.  He said Russian 
Deputy FoMin Chizhov would visit Ljubljana in early January, 
and Rupel will travel to Moscow in February.  Clearly stating 
that the problems in Sofia were \"Russia\'s fault,\" Rupel 
characterized relations with the Russians as \"good compared 
to the past.\"  He said he intended to \"work with them as much 
as possible without sacrificing the principles of the OSCE, 
NATO and the EU.\"  Rupel concluded that he wished to improve 
the way decisions were reached within the OSCE and break a 
\"bad tradition\" of starting negotiations too late for the 
next OSCE ministerial declaration. 
 
MINIKES: ENGAGING THE RUSSIANS 
------------------------------ 
 
5.  (C) Minikes agreed with Rupel\'s approach and told Rupel 
that the NATO declaration was a \"piece of cake\" compared to 
what the OSCE had tried to accomplish in Sofia.  Minikes 
offered Rupel the full support of the U.S., saying \"almost 
everyone would like you to succeed, but their (the Russians\') 
definition of success may be different than ours.\"  Rupel 
replied, \"they\'ve come a long way,\" prompting Minikes to 
remind him to \"look at what they do and not at what they 
say.\"  Minikes told Rupel he was pleased with Rupel\'s 
 
 
emphasis on \"starting early\" and keeping the end goal in 
sight. 
 
ASSESSING THE RUSSIANS 
---------------------- 
 
6.  (C) Rupel characterized his interactions with the Russian 
delegation at Sofia.  Despite a history of earlier 
interactions with former FoMin Ivanov, whom he called \"more 
accessible and less dogmatic,\" Rupel said that \"with Lavrov 
(in Sofia) it was all formulae.\"  Rupel had \"some 
reservations\" about Lavrov.  He expressed frustration with 
Chizhov, who had shown \"a lot of bonhomie\" when working for 
Ivanov but who had become more like Lavrov, \"just a little 
worse\" in Sofia.  Minikes said that identifying an 
interlocutor among the Russians was problematic, given that 
Borodavkin was \"on a short leash\" and Azimov had \"little 
imagination.\"  Nonetheless, he praised Alexander Grushko as 
being very capable, to which Rupel agreed. 
 
THE TOLERANCE AGENDA/EMINENT PERSONS 
------------------------------------ 
 
7.  (C) Minikes complimented Rupel\'s remarks at the Sofia 
ministerial, in particular on the need for OSCE to engage not 
just \"east of Vienna.\"  Rupel replied that this remark was a 
concession to the CIS and a reaction to the Astana statement. 
 Minikes also urged Rupel to focus on the Eminent Persons 
initiative.  At the working lunch, Minikes told Gerzina the 
U.S. would explore U.S. candidates for the panel and forward 
names to Rupel.  He urged Slovenia to be aggressive in its 
pursuit of a qualified panel, stressing that simply sending 
out a letter to OSCE Ambassadors would not suffice.  The 
panel should focus not on how the OSCE should do its job, 
Minikes further stressed, but where and what the OSCE\'s job 
should be.  OSCE needed to find its \"copetitive advantage,\" 
and the panel could help dothis. 
 
OSCE: THE \"HALFWAY HOUSE\" ON THE ROAD TO DMOCRACY 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
8.  (C) Ruminating on the role of theOSCE in contrast o 
NATO and the EU, Rupel descrbed the OSCE as the \"halfway 
house\" for countrie making the transition to western-style 
democracis.  The OSCE must try to \"seduce these countries\" 
without shared NATO and EU values into democracy,he said. 
Rupel invoked his background as a socioogist as he described 
the importance of promoting universal or European standards 
over local standards on human rights and democratization.  He 
stressed that local standards cannot be allowed to prevail 
\"when human rights and human lives are in question.\"  Minikes 
urged Rupel to engage in such a conversation with Lavrov; 
however, Rupel replied, \"he\'s tougher than that.\"  Minikes 
then drove home the importance of engaging the Russians early 
and often. 
 
DEEPENING THE BILATERAL RELATIONSHIP: JANSA TO WASHINGTON? 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
9.  (C) In response to Minikes\'s suggestion that Rupel visit 
the Secretary no later than February, Rupel said he would be 
very eager to pay such a visit, but his priority was to 
arrange for PM Jansa to visit Washington.  Rupel said the GoS 
wants to \"re-establish the good relations... the deeply 
friendly relations\" that it had with Washington in the past. 
Rupel said relations with the U.S. had \"not been spoiled, but 
dented\" in the last couple years. 
 
SECRETARY GENERAL: STARTING THE SEARCH ANEW? 
 
SIPDIS 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
10.  (C) Minikes told Rupel that the U.S. would not support 
the nomination of Stoudemann for OSCE SecGen, saying \"we are 
solidly behind de Brichambaud.\"  Rupel asked if the U.S. 
position was negotiable, and Minikes answered, \"No.\"  Minikes 
said that, at this point, Chirac would need to call Putin if 
the nomination was to be pushed forward.  Rupel noted that 
Lavrov had said Russia would not support an EU candidate for 
SecGen.  Minikes countered that a Chirac-Putin phone call 
could \"go a long way.\"  Later at the working lunch, Gerzina 
told Minikes that Slovenia would be prepared to start a new 
search for a SecGen soon after 01 January if there was no 
compromise in the next few weeks.  Gerzina said that support 
for the Albanian candidate was growing within SEE but that 
Chizhov had told him the Russians considered Stoudemann to be 
the best choice.  Minikes urged the Slovenes to stay in close 
 
 
touch with the French Ambassador to the OSCE, saying \"give 
this (the French candidate) a chance.\" 
 
SCALES OF CONTRIBUTION 
---------------------- 
 
11.  (C) Rupel straightforwardly asked Minikes, \"what should 
we do about (scales of contribution)?\"  Minikes called the 
Russian solution \"patently ridiculous\" and said it would skew 
the political dynamics of the OSCE to have the U.S. or any 
one country contributing such a high percentage of the 
budget.  Later at the working lunch, Minikes told 
participants that the U.S. could live with either a recent 
Canadian proposal or either of the two Bulgarian proposals, 
provided there was no \"linkage\" by the Russians on other 
issues.  When Gerzina said linkage seemed to be on the 
Russian agenda, Minikes urged the GoS to prevail upon its 
colleagues within the EU to help \"surround Russia\" by upping 
their contributions slightly. 
 
MINIKES: THE NEED FOR SLOVENIAN LEADERSHIP 
------------------------------------------ 
 
12.  (C) Minikes concluded the meeting by urging Rupel to 
exercise strong leadership in his role as OSCE Chairman.  He 
suggested arranging for an early visit to Moldova and 
Georgia, along with the assignment of a special 
representative to handle the frozen conflicts in the 
Caucasus.  Suggesting the importance to Rupel of doing 
\"important things,\" Minikes said the OSCE role in Afghanistan 
was important, the OSCE\'s current role in Ukraine is 
important and that a role for the OSCE in Iraq and Palestine 
will be important, as well.  Rupel said that Iraq was \"not in 
the center\" of Slovenia\'s agenda for the OSCE, but that 
Palestine was a necessary part of OSCE\'s engagement.  When 
Minikes pointed out that the Iraqi Central Election 
Commission had invited the OSCE to contribute by sending 
election monitors, Rupel said he had received conflicting 
information about the OSCE in Iraq from the UN.  Minikes 
handed over a copy of the invitation letter from the Iraqi 
Election Commission and urged engagement. 
 
WORKING LUNCH: CONTINUED EMPHASIS ON ENGAGING RUSSIA 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
13.  (C) Engagement with Russia remained the central theme at 
the working lunch with nine of the MFA\'s twelve OSCE Task 
Force members.  Gerzina stressed that Slovenia is \"talking to 
Russia all the time in a permanent dialogue.\"  He agreed with 
Minikes that Russia should not be allowed to go \"forum 
shopping\" among the OSCE, NATO and the EU.  Following his 
earlier meeting, Minikes said Rupel is \"clearly an 
intelligent man with ideas\" and underscored the USG\'s pledge 
to \"work hard to make sure (Slovenia) is never surprised\" 
during its OSCE Chairmanship.  Minikes concluded the meeting 
by touching in brief detail on the range of USG positions on 
virtually all open OSCE issues.  The OSCE Task Force members 
were very appreciative of his time and clearly welcomed his 
input. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
14.  (C) Rupel was very engaged and well briefed in his 
meeting with Minikes, which lasted nearly an hour longer than 
the scheduled 20 minutes.  During the meeting Rupel clearly 
demonstrated his willingness to seek out and listen to U.S. 
advice on matters of importance within the OSCE.  This stance 
is yet another example of the new Jansa-led GoS desire to 
\"deepen\" relations with the U.S., a phrase that is quickly 
becoming the standard opening line as COM calls on the newly 
confirmed cabinet ministers.  While Rupel and Gerzina 
professed to agree with Minikes\'s views on engaging the 
Russians, we think that hearing the message directly from 
Amb. Minikes in the lead up to the Slovenian Chairmanship 
will help buttress the Slovenes\' resolve.  Rupel will try to 
deal with the Russians diplomatically.  His comments to COM 
and Minikes show that he knows what kind of leadership will 
be required, though, for the Slovenes to make the most of 
what may be a contentious year within the OSCE.  He and his 
team also made it clear that the support of the U.S. within 
the OSCE will be extremely important to the GoS as CiO.  END 
COMMENT 
 
15.  (U) EUR/RPM OSCE Coordinator Greta Holtz cleared this 
cable.  Amb. Minikes did not have an opportunity to clear 
 
 
this cable before his departure from Ljubljana. 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"24025","12/14/2004 10:20","04LJUBLJANA1109","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE253550","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS LJUBLJANA 001109 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR A/OPR/OEM 
 
FRANKFURT FOR RIMC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AADP, ANET, KCOG, KRIM 
SUBJECT: RETURN OF OLD EMERGENCY NETWORK (ENET) 
NOTEBOOK COMPUTERS 
 
REF: STATE 253550 
 
1.  Per Ref instructions post is returning two 6300T 
notebook computers. 
Shipping details are provided below. 
 
A)  Date of Shipment:                  December 15, 
2004 
B)  ADM Numbers:                      702851,  702699 
C)  Pouch Registration Number:   5248976 
 
2.  Point of contact is IMO John Combs at 
CombsJE@state.gov 
Regards. 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"24030","12/14/2004 11:15","04LJUBLJANA1111","Embassy Ljubljana","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L  LJUBLJANA 001111 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE AND L/LEI (K. PROPP) 
USDOJ FOR OIA (D. GAYNUS) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/13/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINR, SI 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: COM MEETS NEW JUSTICE MINISTER LOVRO 
STURM 
 
 
Classified By: Chief of Mission Thomas B. Robertson for reasons 1.4(b) 
and (d). 
 
1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  On 13 December, COM called on newly 
confirmed Justice Minister Lovro Sturm and raised 
denationalization of AmCit-held property, court backlogs, the 
pending Slovenian request for the return of alleged financial 
criminal Davorin Sadar, and the need to negotiate a mutual 
legal assistance (MLA) protocol under the overarching U.S.-EU 
agreement.  Telling COM he wanted to \"deepen ties\" between 
the two countries, Sturm mentioned the possibility of 
improving relations between U.S. and Slovenian young lawyers, 
and he made a plug for inviting prominent guests from the 
U.S. to speak in Slovenia.  COM was accompanied by DCM, 
Conoff and Pol-Miloff.  Sturm was joined by State Secretary 
Robert Marolt, Chief of Staff Janko Koren, and staffer Blaz 
Ivanc.  Hours after the meeting, Slovenian press outlets 
reported that COM had \"promised\" Sturm that the U.S. would 
extradite Sadar.  Embassy issued a press release on 14 
December clarifying the inaccurate report.  END SUMMARY 
 
JUDICIAL REFORM AND BILATERAL EXCHANGES 
--------------------------------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) After Sturm opened the meeting by expressing his 
wish to \"deepen ties\" between the U.S. and Slovenia, COM 
agreed that efforts should be made to deepen and improve the 
good bilateral relationship that already exists.  COM 
highlighted a series of recent and upcoming exchanges focused 
on legal and judicial reform, and he asked Sturm to suggest 
specific areas for future cooperation.  Sturm said he would 
like to see improved education and research opportunities in 
the U.S. for young Slovenian lawyers.  He also encouraged the 
possibility of inviting prominent U.S. guests to give 
lectures in Slovenia, mentioning former Education Secretary 
William Bennett and columnist Thomas Sowell by name. 
 
DENATIONALIZATION 
----------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) Despite an impressive record in Slovenia on 
resolving denationalization cases, COM told Sturm the process 
seemed to work more slowly for AmCits and asked if procedures 
might somehow be streamlined.  Sturm said he was quite 
familiar with the issue from his days as a Constitutional 
Court judge and pointed to the Constitutional Court\'s 
decision to give priority to denationalization cases.  He 
assured COM that AmCits are not being discriminated against 
and attributed delays to the difficult nature of certain 
cases.  DCM highlighted the specific case of a city-run 
kindergarten adjacent to the Embassy as one such difficult 
AmCit case, where political equities may have contributed to 
delays. 
 
COURT BACKLOGS 
-------------- 
 
4.  (SBU) COM expressed concern about the Slovenian court 
system\'s considerable backlog issue, highlighting the 
negative implications for foreign direct investment when 
businessmen cannot rely on swift justice to settle commercial 
disputes.  Sturm said improving backlogs is \"one of the 
greatest tasks of the Ministry\" but that the problem would 
not be easy to solve.  Nonetheless, he said the MoJ will look 
at ways to optimize court procedures and improve legislation 
to deal with the problem.  He asked for help from U.S. 
experts, noting that one-third of backlog problems stem from 
delayed execution of judgments.  COM suggested inviting D.C. 
Superior Court Judge Nan Shuker to continue her work with the 
Slovenian judiciary in this area. 
 
EXTRADITION AND DAVORIN SADAR 
----------------------------- 
 
5.  (C) COM told Sturm that progress was being made on 
Slovenia\'s request for the provisional arrest and return of 
Slovenian citizen Davorin Sadar, who had been accused in 
Slovenia of financial crimes.  COM said it appeared Sadar 
would be deported rather than being extradited.  Sturm said 
he had heard about the deportation solution and agreed that 
it would be simpler.  Conoff stressed that U.S. law forbids 
speaking to the press about specific deportation and/or 
extradition cases.  Conoff told Sturm that Sadar would be 
 
 
escorted back to Slovenia by a DHS officer if he loses in his 
deportation hearing appeal.  When pressed by Sturm for the 
timing of Sadar\'s deportation, Conoff said he did not know 
but guessed by the end of January 2005. 
 
6.  (U) More generally on the topic of extradition, COM told 
Sturm the U.S. looked forward to starting negotiations soon 
with MoJ on a bilateral protocol to the 2003 U.S.-EU 
Extradition and Mutual Legal Assistance Agreement.  He 
explained that protocols will be negotiated with each EU 
member state under the overarching U.S.-EU Agreement. 
 
THE SADAR CASE AND THE SLOVENIAN PRESS 
-------------------------------------- 
 
7.  (C) Hours after the meeting, Slovenian press outlets 
reported that COM \"assured Justice Minister Lovro Sturm in 
Monday\'s talks that the U.S. would extradite Davorin Sadar.\" 
Embassy issued a press statement on 14 December to clarify 
the record, and Embassy protocol officer spoke with Koren to 
ask if any of the participants in the meeting had spoken to 
the press and tell them that - if so - the information they 
released was inaccurate and could hamper proceedings over 
Sadar.  Koren was very apologetic and attributed the \"error\" 
to the inexperience of the new Minister\'s team. 
 
8.  (U) The text of the Embassy press statement is as follows: 
 
\"In a meeting December 13 with Justice Minister Dr. Lovro 
Sturm, U.S. Ambassador Thomas B. Robertson discussed the 
Embassy\'s ongoing cooperative legal efforts in the case of 
Davorin Sadar, a Slovene citizen.  The Slovene government has 
announced it is requesting that U.S. authorities return Sadar 
to Slovenia.  While the Embassy is unable to fully discuss 
the details of this case due to privacy laws, we would like 
to note that recent news stories reporting that Ambassador 
Robertson had promised the U.S. would extradite Sadar are not 
accurate.  As the Ambassador pointed out in his meeting, the 
decision whether or not to extradite an individual is the 
responsibility of judicial authorities in the United States, 
and these authorities are currently reviewing the Slovene 
government\'s request.\" 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
9.  (C) COM\'s meeting with Sturm began auspiciously enough 
with mutual pledges to deepen the bilateral relationship and 
a productive review of current bilateral issues.  Sturm\'s 
office managed to display newcomers\' incompetence, though, by 
leaking an inaccurate report to the press about what 
transpired between COM and Sturm behind closed doors.  We 
hope the Embassy\'s press statement will put an end to any 
misconceptions the press and public may have about the Sadar 
case.  After a warranted expression of frustration by the 
Embassy, though, we look forward to taking Sturm at his word 
about wishes to deepen cooperation on justice and home 
affairs issues in the future. 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"24175","12/16/2004 10:41","04LJUBLJANA1119","Embassy Ljubljana","CONFIDENTIAL","04LJUBLJANA1047","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L  LJUBLJANA 001119 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE, EUR/RPM 
TREASURY FOR VIMAL ATUKORALA 
COMMERCE FOR ITA/SAVICH 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/14/2014 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, PREL, SI 
SUBJECT: COM CALL ON NEW SLOVENE FINANCE MINISTER, ANDREJ 
BAJUK 
 
REF: LJUBLJANA 1047 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Thomas B. Robertson Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
1. (SBU)  Summary.  Ambassador paid a courtesy call on newly 
confirmed Finance Minister, Andrej Bajuk, on December 13. 
Accompanying the Ambassador were DCM and Pol/Econ chief. 
Bajuk, interestingly, held the meeting with no staff present. 
 Throughout the discussion, Bajuk stressed the need for the 
new government to move quickly and to have some early, up 
front, success stories on privatization, tax reform and new 
investment.  He also underscored the need for support and 
assistance from the USG and multilateral banks in order to be 
able to achieve these early successes. Bajuk made a strong 
pitch that Slovenia not be forced to graduate from EBRD and 
other multilateral bank programs prematurely.  Though 
Slovenia has made a good case for itself as a stable and 
prosperous country, many of the difficult privatizations have 
been long delayed and will be difficult to manage properly 
without international support.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------------------- 
PRIVATIZATION - NEED EARLY SUCCESS 
---------------------------------- 
 
2.  (C)  Relative to an earlier meeting on November 12 
(reftel), Bajuk seemed more relaxed and focused on what he 
needed to and could do in the short-term.  On the 
privatization front, he wants to work on the banking sector 
first and has his sights set on Nova Kreditna Banka Maribor 
(NKBM).  He is convinced that once average Slovenes 
understand how banks are supposed to work - catering to the 
small and medium sized customer as well as the corporate 
behemoths - they will be less concerned about who owns them. 
Keeping in mind it will be difficult to overcome the Slovene 
aversion to foreign investors, Bajuk thinks getting the EBRD 
on board as an investor will provide a good transition to 
full privatization.  Bajuk fully expects strong opposition to 
his plans, and he seems prepared to debate the issue 
publicly.  Should the decision come to a referendum, 
something that can happen if 30 parliamentary deputies want 
one or if enough voter signatures are gathered, Bajuk is 
certain he will prevail. 
 
3.  (C)  Bajuk would also like to back the government out of 
the private sector through diversification and privatization 
of the government run pension fund known by its acronym KAD. 
KAD is government managed, 100% invested in Slovene stocks, 
and by far the biggest player in the Ljubljana Stock 
Exchange.  Though the plan did not seem fully crystallized, 
and we had not heard about this in earlier meetings or in the 
press, Bajuk has a plan to privatize the fund.  His idea is 
to convert to private management and diversified investments 
in 10% annual increments. 
 
4.  (C)  The first weeks in office seem to have been full of 
revelations for Bajuk, one important one being the extreme 
difficulty he will have privatizing Telekom Slovenije.  Bajuk 
was clear that he was not abandoning this goal (an issue on 
which he ran during the campaign), but that he would push it 
down the road a little in order to better concentrate on 
having success with the banks.  He knows it will be difficult 
and wants to be sure privatization succeeds. 
 
---------- 
INVESTMENT 
---------- 
 
5. (SBU)  In addition to success in privatization, Bajuk 
stressed the need to have success with a foreign investor. 
He lamented that there was no \"greenfield\" investment in 
Slovenia and this must be addressed.  He looked to the 
Ambassador for ideas.  The Ambassador suggested a trade 
mission to the US which would included key government 
officials as well as members of the Slovene business 
community.  Again, the Ambassador underscored the need for 
Slovenia to develop a strong, positive message about business 
opportunities and to bring itself to the attention of 
potential investors in the U.S. and elsewhere. 
 
-------------- 
 
 
TAX LAW REFORM 
-------------- 
 
6. (SBU) Bajuk hopes an early political victory will be a 
change to the draft capital gains tax law submitted by the 
previous administration and currently under parliamentary 
consideration.  If he can get his changes accepted, he will 
demonstrate to the management of large Slovene companies that 
he is not out to get them and can keep campaign promises. 
Some have cried foul that his plan only benefits the wealthy, 
but Bajuk sees this as an \"entrepreneur friendly\" measure. 
Bajuk\'s plan, as explained to the Ambassador, would 
effectively reduce the short-term capital gains rate to 30% 
and the long term rate to 20% for the large shareholder.  The 
vote is to be taken on Thursday, December 16.  Post will 
report separately on those results. 
 
------------------------------ 
NATO OBLIGATION - HARD TO MEET 
------------------------------ 
 
7. (C) The transition has also given Bajuk a chance to look 
at the books for the first time, and he expressed concern 
about Slovenia\'s ability to meet the 2% of GDP military 
budget commitment by 2008.  While not saying outright that he 
would be unable to meet the obligation, he did suggest that 
he would need to be able to show some sort of tangible 
benefit to the Slovene people, and suggested that \"dual use\" 
investments could be considered, without giving examples. 
The Ambassador reminded Bajuk of the commitment made by the 
previous government and reiterated by current Prime Minister 
Jansa, to which Bajuk responded that it would also be 
important to ensure that all the money was really being spent 
on military necessities - suggesting this may not have been 
the case previously. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
8. (C) It is clear that Bajuk is gaining command of his 
brief.  He has more focus - if not vision - about where he 
needs to concentrate his efforts and political clout.  There 
seems to be a recognition emerging from the government and 
private sector that Slovenia\'s days of \"gradual transition\" 
are over and the painful work of moving the government out of 
the economy must begin in earnest.  Bajuk also has a large, 
unwieldy ministry to contend with.  It is spread out across 
the city in eight different locations, and staffed by 
entrenched bureaucrats and LDS appointees who may not be as 
enthused about change as he is.  He will have to work hard to 
find trustworthy aides and to also gain the trust and support 
of his ministry in order to ensure success in his endeavors. 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"24238","12/17/2004 9:57","04LJUBLJANA1121","Embassy Ljubljana","SECRET","04SECSTATE267711","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T LJUBLJANA 001121 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/SCE AND S/WCI 
TREASURY FOR OFAC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/16/2014 
TAGS: KAWC, PREL, MOPS, EFIN, ETTC, SI, ICTY 
SUBJECT: OPERATION BALKAN VICE V: SLOVENIA 
 
REF: SECSTATE 267711 
 
Classified By: Acting Deputy Chief of Mission Caroline Mangelsdorf for 
reasons 1.4(b) and (d). 
 
1.  (S) Pol-Miloff delivered reftel talking points and list 
to MFA International Security Department staffers Bostjan 
Jerman and Maja Zuzek on 17 December.  Jerman and Zuzek 
received the information gratefully and said they would pass 
it on directly to representatives at the Bank of Slovenia, 
Office for the Prevention of Money-Laundering, and other key 
persons within the GoS who may be investigating specific 
cases.  Our experience in the past has shown that MFA can 
disseminate this information among the relevant parties more 
quickly and efficiently than the Embassy.  Our contacts in 
the past have been very conscientious of the need to do this, 
and we are confident that Jerman and Zuzek will follow suit. 
Jerman said he did not know if Slovenia had restrictions in 
place with respect to any of the entities or individuals 
named in the demarche.  He said he would keep the Embassy 
apprised of any relevant decisions or developments, though. 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"24244","12/17/2004 11:25","04LJUBLJANA1125","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS LJUBLJANA 001125 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE AND PM/WRA 
BELGRADE FOR I. CAMPBELL AND A. CARLSON (PODGORICA) 
PRISTINA FOR F. EVANS 
SARAJEVO FOR J. MOORE 
SKOPJE FOR T. ALLEN 
SOFIA FOR L. LOWDER 
TIRANA FOR N. ZHU 
ZAGREB FOR K. SELINGER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, KHDP, SI 
SUBJECT: INVITATION TO MINE ACTION CONFERENCE; LJUBLJANA, 
JAN 13-14, 2005 
 
1.  (U) INVITATION:  PM/WRA and Embassy Ljubljana would like 
to announce an upcoming Regional Mine Action Coordination 
(RMAC) Conference, scheduled to take place in Ljubljana on 
13-14 January 2005.  PM/WRA Senior Program Coordinator and 
Program Manager for Demining in the Balkans Murphey McCloy 
will attend.  Posts should send the officer with primary 
responsibility for the demining portfolio to this conference. 
 For posts with minimal mine action dealings, the officer 
handling SA/LW projects should attend.  PM/WRA has generously 
offered to fund transportation and lodging costs for one 
participant from each of the following posts to attend the 
conference: Belgrade, Podgorica, Pristina, Sarajevo, Skopje, 
Sofia, Tirana, and Zagreb. 
 
2.  (U) PURPOSE:  For the first time since the creation of 
the International Trust Fund for Demining and Mine Victim 
Assistance (ITF) in Slovenia in 1998, PM/WRA does not have a 
direct representative in the region.  This is a planned state 
of affairs that reflects the maturity of the U.S. program for 
providing mine action assistance in the Balkans.  With the 
recent departure of the Regional Mine Action Coordinator from 
his base in Konjic, Bosnia, PM/WRA sees this conference as an 
opportunity to gather Embassy Political and 
Political-Military Officers in the region in one place at one 
time to talk about ways to ensure the best communication 
possible as posts take on a more active role in ITF tendering 
processes and the oversight of SA/LW and mine action 
projects.  As most of you know already, the USG has donated 
over USD 72 million to the ITF for mine action projects since 
1998.  Your participation in the conference will help ensure 
that the coordination/cooperation mechanisms are in place to 
guarantee that the considerable USG funds for SA/LW and mine 
action projects in the region are put to good use. 
 
3.  (U) PROGRAM:  Day 1 will start with internal meetings at 
Embassy Ljubljana to discuss USG priorities in the region, 
communication with PM/WRA, the intersection of public 
diplomacy and mine action, and other topics of interest to 
the attendees.  Day 1 will continue in the afternoon with 
presentations about major U.S.-funded initiatives in the 
region, including the Mine Dog Detection Center in Bosnia and 
the Regional Center for Underwater Demining in Montenegro. 
Day 2 will focus on field trips to visit the ITF Headquarters 
in Ig, Slovenia, and the Institute for Rehabilitation of the 
Republic of Slovenia (IRRS), where mine victims have been 
rehabilitated.  A more detailed schedule will be sent to 
participants closer to the date of the conference.  If you 
would like to request certain topics to be addressed by a 
PM/WRA representative or have other suggestions to maximize 
the benefit gained by conference participants, please send 
your ideas to Pol-Miloff John Crosby at the address in para 
4, with a cc to Mr. McCloy at mccloym@state.gov. 
 
4.  (U) LOGISTICS:  Participants are requested to arrive by 
the evening of 12 January or early morning on 13 January to 
allow for two full conference days on Thursday and Friday, 
13-14 January.  As funding for participants\' travel will be 
arranged from PM/WRA\'s \"Experts Travel Fund\" on deposit at 
the ITF, participants are requested to notify Pol-Miloff John 
Crosby (CrosbyJR@state.gov; 386-1-200-5534; IVG: 762-5534), 
ITF staffer Mojca Petrovcic (ljubljana@itf-fund.si; 
386-1-479-6580), and Mr. McCloy at the address in para 3 
about their intention to attend the Conference and their 
travel requests.  Posts are asked only to cover Meals and 
Incidentals expenses for conference participants.  Please 
confirm your attendance as soon as possible via email to 
Crosby, Petrovcic and McCloy, in addition to sending a front 
channel cable addressed to both Secstate (slugged for PM/WRA 
(M. McCloy)) and Ljubljana (slugged for Pol-Miloff J. Crosby). 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"24332","12/20/2004 11:12","04LJUBLJANA1128","Embassy Ljubljana","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE268633","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

201112Z Dec 04
","C O N F I D E N T I A L LJUBLJANA 001128 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT. FOR EUR/NCE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/20/2014 
TAGS: EPET, ECON, KPAO, PREL, PHUM, RS, SI 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA ON YUKOS AUCTION 
 
REF: SECSTATE 268633 
 
Classified By: Amb. Thomas B. Robertson Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
1.  (C)  Pol/econ chief delivered reftel points to Angelina 
Trajkovski of the MFA\'s Office for Eastern Europe on December 
20.  Trajkovski explained that no official reaction at the 
minister level had been developed, but that this was clearly 
a step backward for Russia and of concern to Slovenia.  While 
Trajkovski is not aware of any Slovenes involved in the oil 
or gas industry in Russia, there are companies with 
production facilities (drug maker Krka for example) and joint 
ventures or considering expanding business in Russia. 
 
------------------------ 
ONLY A STUDENT OF RUSSIA 
------------------------ 
 
2.  (C)  Trajkovski spent seven years at Slovenia\'s mission 
in Moscow, 1993-2000, and said that she was both surprised 
and not surprised at recent developments in Moscow.  She 
thought it was important to note that Putin is extremely 
popular across Russia and this popularity conveys legitimacy 
(in the eyes of the Russians) to his consolidation efforts. 
However, she did not think this popularity would translate 
into an extension of his tenure beyond what is 
constitutionally permitted, nor a Ukraine-style power play. 
Putin, she thought, would have more finesse.  Despite her 
long tenure in Moscow and nearly four years covering Russia 
from Ljubljana, Trajkovski declined to be labeled an \"expert\" 
on Russia, saying wryly, \"one can never become an expert, 
only an eternal student.\" 
 
--------------------------------- 
SLOVENIA\'S DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIP 
--------------------------------- 
 
3.  (C)  When asked about GoS views on an EU statement about 
Yukos, Trajkovski was sure Slovenia would support one, but it 
would be important to work out a message acceptable to all. 
She fully appreciated the neuralgic reaction former Soviet 
bloc countries now in the EU have to issues related to 
Russia, but she also noted that Slovenia does not have any of 
this negative baggage in its own relationship with Russia. 
In fact, since first opening its mission in Moscow, relations 
have been generally positive.  She was careful to add that 
this did not mean the GOS would be soft on Russia, only that 
at this time, there is little strain in this bilateral 
relationship.  (Comment: As OSCE CiO, Slovenia will have to 
draw heavily on its banked good-will with Russia to make 2005 
a successful year in office.  End Comment.) 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"24393","12/21/2004 9:00","04LJUBLJANA1129","Embassy Ljubljana","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE268243","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L LJUBLJANA 001129 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/21/2014 
TAGS: PREL, TRGY 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA ON ITER 
 
REF: SECSTATE 268243 
 
Classified By: Acting DCM Caroline Mangelsdorf, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
. 
 
1. EconOff delivered reftel talking points to Dr. Milos 
Komac, State Undersecretary in the Scientific Office at the 
Ministry of Higher Education and Science.  Komac is Post\'s 
chief contact on issues related to ITER.  Komac mentioned 
during the demarche that Slovenia is very interested in 
participating in the ITER project and stated that Slovenia 
would prefer the Cadarache solution as it would be easier for 
Slovenia to contribute.  Several times during the demarche, 
Komac commented that Slovenia\'s participation in ITER would 
be \'negligible\' even if Cadarache were selected.  However, he 
did note that he would like to see Slovenia take as active a 
role as possible in ITER stating that he felt it was 
\'important for the country\'. 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"24516","12/23/2004 6:28","04LJUBLJANA1134","Embassy Ljubljana","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L  LJUBLJANA 001134 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/21/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MARR, PINR, SI, NATO 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: COM MEETS NEW DEFENSE MINISTER ERJAVEC 
 
Classified By: Chief of Mission Thomas B. Robertson for reasons 1.4(b) 
and (d). 
 
1.  (C) SUMMARY:  In a 22 December courtesy call by COM, new 
DefMin Karl Erjavec called for intensifying cooperation 
between the U.S. and Slovenia, particularly in the field of 
training.  Erjavec confirmed that the GoS remained focused on 
its commitment to spend two percent of GDP on defense by 
2008.  He said Slovenia would send more intelligence experts 
to aid EUFOR in Bosnia in 2005, while Defense Policy Director 
Uros Krek said the Slovenes were evaluating options for 
joining a PRT within ISAF.  Krek added that the GoS hoped to 
submit a list of equipment available for Iraqi Security 
Forces by the end of December.  On the issue of no caveats 
for NATO-assigned SAF officers, Krek said no caveats exist 
but that cabinet approval would be required for any onward 
deployment from NATO HQs to Iraq or other destinations.  END 
SUMMARY 
 
2.  (C) As the first ambassador to be received by new DefMin 
Karl Erjavec, COM was accompanied by Pol/Econ Chief, 
Pol-Miloff and Bilateral Affairs Officer (BAO).  Erjavec was 
joined by head of MoD\'s Defense Policy Directorate Uros Krek 
and Chief of Staff Franc Stanovnik.  Erjavec spoke in Slovene 
throughout the meeting, but he did not ask for English to 
Slovene translations of COM\'s statements.  After Erjavec made 
initial statements about \"intensifying cooperation\" that have 
become the GoS mantra in COM\'s meetings with the new cabinet 
ministers, COM led Erjavec point by point through a series of 
issues, both bilateral and multilateral. 
 
DEFENSE BUDGET:  SPENDING WISELY TO MAINTAIN PUBLIC SUPPORT 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
3.  (C) In response to COM\'s call for the new GoS to honor 
Slovenia\'s defense spending commitments, Erjavec confirmed 
that Slovenia\'s goal remains two percent of GDP by 2008.  He 
acknowledged the need to spend those funds carefully in order 
to maintain public support for Slovenia\'s gradually 
increasing defense budget.  In this vein, Erjavec said MoD 
would undertake a comprehensive review of SAF equipment to 
ensure Slovenia would be able to reach its NATO Force Goals 
most efficiently. 
 
FUTURE CONTRIBUTIONS IN AFGHANISTAN, BOSNIA AND IRAQ 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
4.  (C) Signalling a wish to ensure Slovenia is both meeting 
its commitments to NATO and accruing the benefits of 
membership, Erjavec said Slovenia is evaluating options for 
participating in a Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) led 
by another country under ISAF.  Krek added that defense 
establishment leaders met recently in Bohinjska Bela to focus 
on plans to turn Slovenia\'s Mountain Warfare School into a 
NATO Center of Excellence.  Erjavec thanked COM for USG 
assistance in arranging a planned February visit to 
Afghanistan to see SAF troops deployed to ISAF.  He said 
Slovenia would increase the number of SAF troops stationed in 
Southeastern Europe by sending more intelligence experts to 
EUFOR in Bosnia in 2005.  With respect to Iraq, Krek added 
that, by the end of December, MoD plans to submit to NATO and 
the Embassy a list of equipment available for Iraqi Security 
Forces.  He said the list would include approximately 4000 
AK-47s, among other equipment. 
 
NO CAVEATS FOR SLOVENIAN NATO OFFICERS, BUT... 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
5.  (C) COM pushed Erjavec to consider sending SAF troops to 
a training mission within Iraq, and he urged the GoS to keep 
its policy of placing \"no caveats\" on the deployment of 
Slovene officers assigned to NATO Headquarters.  Krek 
clarified that - while there are no caveats currently in 
place - Slovenian law requires cabinet approval for SAF 
soldiers to be deployed anywhere outside Slovenia.  Noting 
that the GoS is currently in the process of assigning 
officers to NATO Headquarters billets, Krek confirmed that 
cabinet approval would be required even to send an officer 
already assigned to NATO HQs on a mission to a third country. 
 Barring an amendment to the Law on Defense that would 
require a two-thirds majority in Parliament, COM suggested 
that cabinet approval for NATO-billeted officers might be 
drafted to include approval for onward deployments from 
Brussels. 
 
A FOCUS ON TRAINING; NATO LESSONS FOR CROATIAN LEADERS 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
6.  (C) COM highlighted both the BAO-led state partnership 
program with the Colorado National Guard and the Marshall 
Center as opportunities for SAF troops and civilian defense 
officials to participate in training programs and exchanges. 
Erjavec then echoed his call for intensified cooperation, 
noting that Slovenian troops need the best training possible 
to prepare for \"higher risk\" collective defense missions they 
will undertake in the future.  Erjavec said that \"enhancing 
and further expanding\" cooperation with the U.S. is written 
into the GoS coalition agreement.  (NOTE:  Erjavec is the 
only cabinet minister in the new center-right governing 
coalition representing DeSUS, the left-of-center Pensioners 
Party.  END NOTE)  Krek acknowledged that Slovenian 
participation in Marshall Center programs had diminished 
recently but vowed to try to reverse the trend in light of a 
recent letter from COM and the German Ambassador highlighting 
new seminars for 2005.  COM asked the MoD to take an active 
training role itself by cooperating on an upcoming Embassy 
Zagreb-organized visit to expose Croatian decision-makers to 
lessons learned on Slovenia\'s path to NATO membership. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
7.  (C) Erjavec delivered no surprises, but he was clearly 
\"learning the ropes\" in his first defense-related position 
after his experience in the Justice Ministry and working on 
human rights issues.  We were glad to see the incisive, 
reliable Krek at his side, and we hope Krek will remain a 
respected voice within the MoD under Erjavec\'s leadership. 
Looking uncharacteristically harried, Krek told COM before 
the meeting that the transition to new leadership had kept 
him and the Ministry extremely busy.  Despite a steep 
learning curve, and perhaps because of Krek\'s guidance, 
Erjavec seemed in command of his brief.  END COMMENT 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"24606","12/27/2004 2:03","04LJUBLJANA1136","Embassy Ljubljana","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L LJUBLJANA 001136 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/23/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, SI 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: LIBERAL DEMOCRATS HAVE HEADS IN THE SAND 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Thomas B. Robertson for Reasons 1.4 (b) and ( 
d). 
 
1.  (C) After leading Slovene governments for 12 years, the 
Liberal Democracy Party (LDS) became over-confident, 
assuming, perhaps, that inertia would sweep it back into 
office last October 3. Accusations of arrogance have been 
heaped upon the party, even from within, and it is widely 
agreed that a lack of vision and leadership contributed 
significantly to LDS\' poor showing in the elections. 
 
---------- 
BACKGROUND 
---------- 
 
2.  (U)  In 1992, after the dissolution of DEMOS, a 
democratic coalition that defeated the Communists in 
Slovenia\'s first free elections in 1990, LDS emerged as 
Slovenia\'s strongest political party.  That same year, LDS 
received the relative majority in national elections and 
formed its first coalition government.  LDS won enough votes 
to form governments in 1996 and 2000.  In May of 2000, LDS 
lost control of government in a vote of no-confidence, but 
returned to power six months later in special elections when 
it received an unprecedented 36% of the vote. 
 
3.  (U)  During the 10 years from 1992-2002, Janez Drnovsek 
led the LDS and the GOS as prime minister.  Fatigued by years 
of intra-coalition negotiations and a serious bout with 
kidney cancer, Drnovsek decided to run for President (a much 
less demanding position) in 2002. He won Presidential 
elections in November 2002 and chose Anton Rop as his 
successor both as president of the party and as prime 
minister. 
 
------------------ 
A STEP TO THE LEFT 
------------------ 
 
4.  (C)  With Rop in the lead, a pronounced shift to the left 
occurred.  Rop seemed to shrug off the mantle Drnovsek had 
passed to him and determined to chart an independent (of the 
old-line LDS) course for the Government.  Relying primarily 
on his own close circle of advisors, Rop created what would 
become an unbridgeable gap between himself and the 
traditional LDS base of voters and political supporters. 
 
5.  (C) Rop and his party did not heed the signs when the LDS 
and the left essentially lost the elections for European 
Parliament in June 2004.  The LDS treated this result as a 
one-off event rather than a red flag signaling a loss of 
voter support.  Even notoriously pro-LDS polls were 
indicating an LDS drop in popularity.  Yet, Rop and the LDS 
made little extra effort to rally support for the October 
2004 elections.  Slovene voters took a jump to the right and 
the LDS seemed as surprised to lose as Jansa and his 
coalition did to win. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
6.  (C) The loss of both sets of elections in 2004 did little 
to foster real introspection among the LDS leadership. 
Instead of analyzing \"why\" it lost, the party looked to cast 
blame.  Some called publicly for Rop\'s resignation as party 
president, others blamed the media - generally considered a 
strong supporter of LDS - thus alienating another long-time 
constituency.  In an early December party congress, Anton Rop 
was re-elected as president of the LDS, an interesting move 
considering Rop\'s leadership is widely viewed as a primary 
cause of LDS\' recent losses.  If the LDS hopes to do well in 
local elections in 2006 or even to regain power in national 
elections in 2008, it will have to shed its image of 
arrogance and develop a program that appeals to voters 
clearly fed up with how the old-boys club, under Anton Rop, 
had been running the country. 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"24658","12/28/2004 6:27","04LJUBLJANA1138","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS LJUBLJANA 001138 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
FOR CA/EX/CSD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCSY, CMGT, AMGT, AADP 
SUBJECT: HARDWARE ACCEPTANCE CABLE CONSULAR EQUIPMENT: PROFILE 5 
 
REF:  (A) REMEDY #80167, IRF REF #6682, ORDER #38961 
 
      (B) STATE 270157. CURRENT FAX: 386-1-200-5535. PHONE 200- 
      5734. U.S.EMBASSY-LJUBLJANA, PRESERNOVA 31, LJUBLJANA, 
      SLOVENIA 
 
1.  ORDER NUMBER 38961 HAS BEEN INVENTORIED BY POST.  THE SHIPMENT 
IS ACCEPTED. 
 
2. POST APPRECIATES DEPARTMENT\'S ATTENTION TO THIS ISSUE. 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"24659","12/28/2004 6:27","04LJUBLJANA1139","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS LJUBLJANA 001139 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
FOR CA/EX/CSD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCSY, CMGT, AMGT, AADP 
SUBJECT: HARDWARE ACCEPTANCE CABLE CONSULAR EQUIPMENT: MONITORS 
 
REF:  (A) REMEDY #80131, IRF REF #6593, ORDER #38885. 
 
      (B)STATE 264368. CURRENT FAX: 386-1-200-5535. PHONE 200- 
      5734. U.S.EMBASSY-LJUBLJANA, PRESERNOVA 31, LJUBLJANA, 
      SLOVENIA 
 
1.  ORDER NUMBER 38885 HAS BEEN INVENTORIED BY POST.  THE SHIPMENT 
IS ACCEPTED. 
 
2. POST APPRECIATES DEPARTMENT\'S ATTENTION TO THIS ISSUE. 
 
 
NNNN 
"
"25061","1/7/2005 8:56","05LJUBLJANA11","Embassy Ljubljana","CONFIDENTIAL","05SECSTATE2743","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L LJUBLJANA 000011 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/RPM AND EUR/NCE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/06/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MARR, SI, NATO 
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: DEMARCHE DELIVERED ON NATO IN AFGHANISTAN 
 
REF: SECSTATE 2743 
 
Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Dean J. Haas for reasons 1.4(b) 
and (d). 
 
1.  (C) MILITARY CONTRIBUTIONS:  On 06 January, Pol-Miloff 
delivered reftel talking points to MFA Deputy Head of NATO 
Department Stanislav Vidovic.  DATT and Pol-Miloff delivered 
reftel points to MoD Director for Defense Policy Uros Krek 
later the same day.  Both Krek and Vidovic reiterated FoMin 
Dimitrij Rupel\'s 09 December statement from the NATO Foreign 
Ministers Meeting in Brussels that Slovenia would strengthen 
its participation in ISAF during 2005.  Krek said MoD 
officials are consulting with the German MoD about sending 
two Slovenian Armed Forces (SAF) officers as observers to 
join a German-led PRT.  Their task would be to determine in 
what ways Slovenia might contribute further to future PRTs, 
including the possibility of sending civilian experts to 
ISAF.  Krek estimated that the two officers for the PRT would 
be given their orders by 15 February and that they would 
likely arrive in Afghanistan by early April.  He said two SAF 
officers have already been selected for the mission and are 
\"waiting for the green light from the Germans.\" 
 
2.  (C) CIVILIAN DEPLOYMENTS:  The deployment of civilian 
experts to PRTs presents a more difficult issue, according to 
Krek, because Slovenian law does not allow sending civilians 
to join a military mission.  (NOTE:  The Slovenian 
firefighters currently guarding the Kabul airport became 
contract SAF reservists before their deployment.  END NOTE) 
Nonetheless, Krek said legislation is now being drafted to 
support voluntary civilian deployments, and he estimated that 
the first Slovenian civilians - provided that any volunteer - 
would be ready to join PRTs in June 2005. 
 
3.  (C) MFA INSIGHTS:  Vidovic gave much more generalized 
responses than Krek, saying only that a proposal for 
increased ISAF contributions was \"in the consideration phase\" 
and required coordination with MoD and the Slovenian Mission 
to NATO.  Vidovic said that MoD and MFA would meet during the 
third week of January to discuss a proposal before forwarding 
it to the Government cabinet for action.  Vidovic did, 
however, offer his opinion that PM Janez Jansa\'s new 
center-right coalition government had a \"clear vision\" about 
how to fulfill NATO Allies\' expectations, \"especially those 
of the United States.\"  Vidovic very straightforwardly said 
that the former government lacked both the capacity and the 
will to live up to its responsibilities within NATO.  He said 
the new government represents a \"big hope\" for ministry 
staffers working on NATO-related issues. 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 

 2005LJUBLJ00011 - Classification: CONFIDENTIAL 


 
v1.6.2 
"
"25069","1/7/2005 10:48","05LJUBLJANA15","Embassy Ljubljana","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS  LJUBLJANA 000015 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR, SI 
SUBJECT:  SLOVENIA SIGNIFICANT ACTIVITIES REPORT, 
DECEMBER 2004 
 
 
1.  SUMMARY.  The new FMF Training case was signed in 
December and all documentation was completed in time to 
use the case to send nine students to training in 
January.  The ACSA with Slovenia is not in force yet. 
 
2. POLITICAL-MILITARY 
 
A.  FMF/FMS BUDGET 
 
1) ODC submitted the FY07-12 FMF and IMET budget 
request to HQ on 4 Jan.  Slovenia does have uncommitted 
FMF funds remaining but has plans to use the funds; all 
new requests support NATO Force Goals or combat 
capability. 
 
2) The MOD requested a new FMF case for $100,000 to 
purchase spares for their HMMWVs.  The Slovenes want to 
obtain spare parts for their 30 HMMWVs more quickly 
than buying through commercial sales.  The ODC is 
discussing with the US Army the advantages and 
disadvantages of blanket order cases and CLSSA cases to 
determine which would be best for Slovenia. 
 
3.  KEY ISSUES AND SIGNIFICANT EVENTS 
 
A. FMF CASES 
 
1) ENGLISH LANGUAGE TRAINING (S3-D-TAC).  There are 36 
Slovenian students in elementary classes and 48 in 
intermediate classes, which continue until June. Twenty- 
four Slovenian and nine international students from 
Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, and Macedonia completed an 
advanced course in December and took listening, 
speaking, reading, & writing exams based on STANAG 6001 
criteria.  The two teachers who were here TDY from 
DLIELC departed on 17 December.  ODC sent a request for 
two TDY instructors to arrive in January and February 
2005 but we may only be able to get one instructor. 
The LTD chief attended a STANAG 6001 testing 
conference, sponsored by the British Council, in Czech 
Republic; the TDY was paid by the Marshall Center.  An 
amendment for $650,194 for this case was signed in July 
2004. 
 
2) BLANKET TRAINING (S3-B-OAC) The MOD requested a 
Blanket Training FMF case for $100,000.  We appreciate 
the tremendous help and extra work from DSCA in pushing 
this case thru the system as a priority.  The case was 
signed in Dec 04 and all documentation was completed in 
time to use the case to send nine students to class in 
January.  The approval process for courses funded under 
the training case will be the same as courses funded 
under IMET. 
 
3) DRILL INSTRUCTOR (S3-B-OAB).  The drill instructor, 
Sgt Garfield Lyons, arrived on 3 Jan and will be 
working at the Vipava Training Center.  Sgt Lyons will 
observe Slovenia\'s basic training and suggest 
improvements.  Improving basic training is a high 
priority for the Slovenes and they appreciate the US 
Army providing an NCO to help in this effort. 
 
4) DEFENSE PLANNING SYSTEM (S3-B-UAS) LOA for the 
Defense Planning System was signed 24 Nov 04 for 
$111,126.  This case was originally requested before 
FMF funds were frozen in 2003.  An additional class on 
Defense Planning will be added to the case at a later 
date.  CCMR, while in Slovenia for an MTT, discussed 
training for this case with the Slovenes and have 
provided ODC an outline of a course designed to meet 
Slovenia\'s needs. 
 
5) P&A DATA FOR NBC DETECTION HMMWV (S3-B-PBB).  The 
Army established a planning case for developing P&A 
data for a HMMWV outfitted as an NBC detection vehicle. 
P&A data are expected to be available soon.  POTUS set 
aside $1M of Slovenia\'s FY04 FMF funds for NBC 
detection equipment and the set-aside could be used for 
an NBC HMMWV. 
 
B. FMS. 
 
ASOC (S3-D-QAA).  The Slovene MOD requested that the 
Air Sovereignty Operations Center (ASOC) case be 
amended to include an additional 36 months of 
 
 
modernization and sustainment support.  The official 
letter of request was sent on 2 Sep 04.  The amendment 
is expected to cost $1,650,000 ($550,000 per year for 
three years).  The Slovenes recently requested that 
this case be funded with FMF funds instead of national 
funds. 
 
C. DCS/CONTRACTOR. 
 
GPS.  The Slovenes have asked for an official 
explanation of the US approval process to obtain P- 
codes.  ODC sent a message to EUCOM requesting an 
explanation of the process and received an email 
response from the J6 action officer but no official 
response yet.  The Slovene Director of Defense Policy 
is now working the GPS issue too. 
 
D. IMET. 
 
1) Four students were processed for training; one for 
December training and three for January. Due to late 
receipt of the fund cite from SATFA we had to postpone 
for several days the departure of a student to the 
Infantry Captain Career Course (WCN 1145). 
 
2) The Center for Civil-Military Relations (CCMR) at 
the Naval Postgraduate School and the Personnel 
Recruiting Department of the General Staff of the 
Slovene Armed Forces hosted a workshop (14-16 December) 
on \"the Recruitment Process in Professional NATO Armed 
Forces.\"  The workshop proved essential to the Slovene 
recruiting officials in the light of the recent 
Professionalization of the Slovenian Armed Forces.  It 
provided case studies of NATO nations\' recruitment 
process and experiences, as well as some key best 
practices ascertained from academic study.  The 
attendees were 12 NCOs and one officer in charge of 
recruiting of enlisted personnel in regional offices 
all over Slovenia.   The ODC has received very positive 
feedback from the participants of the workshop and 
supports the follow-up event that will take place in 
February 2005.  ODC commends CCMR on selecting a 
faculty team that provided insight on several, rather 
than a single, NATO nation\'s recruiting process. 
Especially invaluable for the Slovene recruiters proved 
to be the knowledge and experiences shared by CW04 
Jacob Klootwijk. 
 
3) Three ECL tests were administered to 17 students in 
December, all candidates for various FY05 IMET courses 
and FMF S3-B-OAC case (IBOS seminar). 
 
E. MARSHALL CENTER. 
 
1) Slovenia nominated two participants for the \"Program 
in Advanced Security Studies.\"  Both participants are 
from the Slovene police. 
 
2) Despite the fact that Slovenia was not invited to 
nominate a candidate for \"Program on Terrorism and 
Security Studies,\" the Faculty of Social Sciences 
expressed an interest in sending one of its staff to 
the course.  The justification included a statement 
that this course would be of great assistance to the 
faculty in developing a class on terrorism and the 
means to fight it.  The request was approved. 
 
F. JCTP/SPP. 
 
1) The BAO attended a meeting with the Ambassador to 
receive the new Minister of Defense, Karl Erjavec on 21 
Dec.  The new Minister has no personal military 
experience; he was previously involved in human rights 
and the justice system. Also in attendance from the 
Slovene government was the Director of Defense Policy 
and the head of the minister\'s office. 
 
2) The BAO is writing a memorandum to the Slovene 
General Staff requesting clarification for the approval 
process for bilateral affairs events.  The Slovene 
Armed Forces recently changed their procedures and 
there is confusion, both internally and externally, 
about their procedures. 
 
3) The BAO will meet with the Slovene J-7 on 12 Jan 05 
 
 
to continue developing concepts for FY2006 events. Five 
events are being targeted toward enhancing the NATO 
Force Goals of: NBC Recon/Decon, Intel Battalion, and 
Aviation deployablity. 
 
5) The BAO conducted a Video Teleconference with 
Colorado SPPC to verify that the system works and can 
be used for further coordination and possible \"mini- 
events\". Video Teleconferencing with EUCOM is a little 
more complicated since all VTC connections are secure. 
However, it was discovered that these VTCs can easily 
be modified to perform in an unclassified mode. 
 
6) The BAO is still waiting for confirmation regarding 
the Small Unit Event exercise approval from ECRA. 
 
4.  PERSONNEL/RESOURCES/LOGISTICS 
 
A.  PERSONNEL: 
 
1) PERSPECTIVE GAINS: None 
2) PERSPECTIVE LOSSES: None 
3) ATTACHED PERSONNEL: 
- Mary Jo Villalobos, Language Center Coordinator 
- Kristin Pedroja, English Test Developer, one year 
- Kathy Lance, English Teacher, one year 
- John Stephens, English Teacher, one year 
- Helen Prevost, English Teacher, one year 
- Terry Jenkins, arrives 14 Jan 05 for 90-day TDY 
- Sgt Garfield Lyons, S3-B-OAB, TDY NTE 90-days, 
arrived 3 Jan 05 
4) ODC CHIEF APPROVED TDY/LEAVE: 
- MAJ Fredericksen, LV 3-7 Jan 05 
- Mary Jo Villalobos, LV 3-4 Jan 05 
5) RATING SCHEME CHANGES: None 
6) EXTENSIONS/CURTAILMENTS: None 
 
B.  RESOURCES. Vehicles and ADP equipment are 100% 
operational.  The office AFN dish was struck by 
lightning and was sent back to EUCOM (SFC Crouse) for 
disposition. 
 
C.  ICASS. No issues. 
 
D. LOGISTICS. 
 
1) The BAO Driver\'s Non-Personal Services contract was 
determined to be an illegal contract by the Embassy. 
EUCOM is currently working with the Embassy to draft a 
new Personal Services contract to replace the current 
one.  The NPS contract does not provide the protection 
for FSN\'s employed by the Embassy which is based upon a 
Memorandum of Agreement between the DoS and DoD dated 
July 2004.  Slovenia is being used as a test bed for 
the new contract since contracts in other countries may 
face the same challenge. 
 
2) The BAO office is waiting for approval to proctor 
the EUCOM Driver\'s exam for individuals that need to 
drive the BAO vehicle. 
 
5. CHIEF/BAO COMMENTS: 
 
- The LTD Chief, Mary Jo Villalobos, received the 
Bronze Medal from the Slovene military at a ceremony in 
honor of her outstanding work managing the English 
Language School.  The Slovenes are expected to assume 
management of the school this year and Ms Villalobos is 
scheduled to leave Slovenia this summer. 
 
- BAO comment: The new Defense Minister announced 
several changes to the military leadership.  Capt (N) 
Renato Petric was appointed Commander of Force Command 
in Vrhnika; previous Commander, Brig Bojan Suligoj, 
will be Assistant of the Chief of GS SAF for 
International Cooperation.  Brig Jozef Zunkovic, 
previous Chief of Operation Staff in GS SAF, was 
appointed Commander of Command for Doctrine, 
Development, Education and Training (equivalent to US 
TRADOC). Brig Janez Kavar will be Assistant of the 
Chief of GS SAF.  Col Dragan Bavcar was appointed Chief 
of Operation Staff in GS SAF. 
 
- The ODC received a request to obtain operational 
costs for the Stryker Brigade Combat Teams from the 
 
 
Slovenes. The BAO is currently working on obtaining 
these figures and understanding why the Slovenes want 
this information. 
 
- ODC asked the MOD for a letter requesting the ACSA 
begin, as is required by the ACSA.  Slovenia has not 
signed the letter since they may want to make changes 
to the Slovene version of the document.  ODC 
recommended that Slovenia provide the letter and, at a 
later date, change the wording of the document if 
desired. 
 
6. POC is Lt Col Margaret Claytor at +386-1-471-2873, 
FAX 471-1577, or email mclaytor@san.osd.mil. 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 

 2005LJUBLJ00015 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED 


 
v1.6.2 
"