
"10252","8/22/2003 17:31","03SANTODOMINGO4390","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SANTODOMINGO4249","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 004390 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA AND G/TIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KCRM, PHUM, PINR, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC NATIONAL POLICE CHIEF CONTINUES 
TO SUPPORT US 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 4249 
 
 1.  (SBU)  SUMMARY.  Ambassador Hertell met with the 
Dominican Republic\'s Director of the National Police, Jaime 
Marte Martinez, to introduce DCM Lisa Kubiske and to thank 
the Director for his support in establishing an 
Anti-Trafficking in Persons Investigation Unit as part of the 
National Police\'s Fraud Section.  The Director outlined some 
of the procedural issues which will complicate the arrest of 
legislator Radhames Garcia now that Congress is in session. 
Marte Martinez downplayed the potential for uncontrolled 
demonstrations or riots after the Pan American Games.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
PRO-YANKEE POLICE CHIEF 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
2.  (SBU)  Ambassador Hertell met with the Director of the 
National Police for the Dominican Republic to introduce DCM 
Lisa Kubiske and to thank the Director for his efforts to 
combat Trafficking in Persons.  Pleased, Marte Martinez 
described himself as a friend, an ally and as \"pro-yankee\". 
 
------------------------------------------- 
HOW CAN GARCIA BE ARRESTED? 
------------------------------------------- 
 
3.  (SBU)  In reponse to the Ambassador\'s question about 
suspected alien smuggler Radhames Garcia, Marte Martinez 
confirmed his view that immunity attaches to Garcia, a 
Deputy, when Congress is in session.  Marte Martinez stated 
that if Garcia is found in the next day or so, the 
outstanding arrest warrant could be executed because, in his 
opinion, it was an open question as to whether Congress is 
legally in session.  The events of August 16, in which shots 
were fired as voting for a new Lower Chamber president was in 
progress, have left the competing political parties vying for 
control (reftel).  If the faction led by Lila Alburquerque 
(former president of the Lower Chamber) produces evidence 
that the vote was illegal or that a recognized recess had 
been called before the vote took place, an argument can be 
made that the August session of Congress has not been legally 
opened.  Hence, Garcia would not have immunity and could be 
arrested.  Nevertheless, if he were to be arrested now, he 
would probably claim constitutional immunity on grounds that 
the Congress was properly called into session on August 16. 
NOTE:  Marte Martinez seemed to be looking for a scenario and 
legal justification for Garcia\'s arrest.  Although possible, 
the scenario was unlikely.  Garcia did not show up for the 
scheduled opening of Congress on August 16 and had not been 
spotted by national police surveillance until he appeared 
outside Congress on August 20.  Alburquerque\'s faction failed 
to produce evidence that Congress was illegally in session 
and the Lower Chamber has been operating in session since 
August 19.  Garcia\'s immunity is currently in force.  END 
NOTE. 
 
4.  (SBU)  Ambassador Hertell asked whether there are any 
circumstances in which a Senator or Congressman could be 
arrested while Congress is in session.  Marte Martinez 
replied that a Congressman could be arrested if caught in the 
act of committing a crime - a \"caso flagrante\".  Marte 
Martinez insisted that accusations against Garcia could not 
be interpreted as a \"caso flagrante\".  Consequently, 
prosecutors could not apply this exception to the general 
immunity provision in the constitution. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
INFORMATION ON LOWER CHAMBER SHOOTING 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
5.  (SBU)  In regard to the incident in the Lower Chamber, 
Marte Martinez said the shots fired were aimed at the 
ceiling.  The electric power to the Chamber had been cut 
prior to the shooting.  He noted that jurisdiction for the 
case is with the Legislative Branch of the Government because 
the shooting took place in Congress.  The National Police 
will not investigate unless asked to do so by the Legislative 
Branch. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
POSSIBLE DEMONSTRATIONS AND UNREST 
------------------------------------------- 
 
6.  (SBU)  Marte Martinez expressed relief that there were no 
major incidents during the Pan American Games.  He 
acknowledged rumors of possible demonstrations after the 
Games, but thought that if they were to occur they would be 
political in nature, at the prodding of opposition party 
members.  He did not give the impression that the National 
Police have geared up for any increase in demonstrations. 
NOTE:  Marte Martinez did not exclude the possibility that 
there would be protests, but he did not think they would 
amount to uncontrollable demonstrations. END NOTE. 
 
7.  (SBU)  COMMENT:  Marte Martinez has worked with the 
Embassy in the past on a range of issues from TIP to consular 
fraud investigations.  He has proved to be helpful and 
reliable, an enormous change for the good compared with his 
predecessor.  We expect this close cooperation and strong 
working relationship to continue.  END COMMENT. 
HERTELL 
"
"10255","8/22/2003 21:20","03SANTODOMINGO4415","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE193266","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 004415 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), ALSO DOL/ILAB TINA 
FAULKNER, DOL/ILAB AMY LEMAR, DOL MIRELLISE VASQUEZ, DRL/IL 
MARINDA HARPOLE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, EIND, ETRD, PHUM, SOCI 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: UPDATE ON CHILD LABOR 
INFORMATION 
 
REF: SECSTATE 193266 
 
1. The GODR is making progress in implementing its 
international commitments to eliminate the worst forms of 
child labor.  Updated information for 2003 Trade and 
Development Act (TDA) reporting purposes follows. 
 
BEGIN ANSWERS TO REFTEL QUESTIONS. 
 
A) Whether the country has adequate laws and regulations 
proscribing the worst forms of child labor? 
 
2. The Government of the Dominican Republic (GODR) ratified 
International Labor Organization (ILO) Convention No. 182 on 
December 15, 2000 and ILO Convention No. 138 on June 15, 
1999.  Dominican laws addressing child labor issues include 
&El Codigo de Trabajo de la Republica Dominicana8 (law 
16-92 of May 29, 1992) and law 136-03, &Codigo para la 
Proteccion de Ninos, Ninas y Adolescentes8 which was 
recently promulgated by President Mejia on August 7, 2003. 
(Copy of law to follow via pouch.)  The 2003 Minors\' Code 
replaces the previous 1994 version (law 14-94) and conforms 
better to international conventions on child labor issues. 
Like the 1992 Dominican Labor Code, the 2003 Minors\' Code 
prohibits employment of children under the age of 14.  Unlike 
the 1992 Dominican Labor Code, the 2003 Minors\' Code includes 
language regulating apprenticeships for adolescents. 
 
3. As mentioned in previous reports, the Ministry of Labor 
Resolution No. 03-93 of January 12, 1993 defines hazardous 
work as &dangerous or unhealthy, which through the nature of 
its execution or the environment in which it is realized, or 
the tools or machines which it employs, may occasion injuries 
to the physical integrity of minors or promote etiological 
factors in the outbreak of illnesses(8 Neither the labor 
code nor the minor,s code specifically defines what 
occupations are considered the worst forms of child labor. 
However, there are governmental programs that target 
industrial areas in which child labor has been a historical 
problem. 
 
4. The 2003 Minors\' Code promotes an inter-institutional 
coordinated system of various government agencies and NGOs to 
protect the human rights of minors, including protection from 
child labor.  The modified code also recognizes a 
not-for-profit institution CONANI (El Consejo Nacional de la 
Ninez y la Adolescencia) as the non-cabinet, decentralized 
public ministry that will be responsible for coordinating 
public policy regarding children,s issues and ensuring 
implementation of the new law.  (Note: CONANI is an 
organization currently headed by the President,s sister, who 
is a long-time activist for children.  Although the new 
Minors\' Code is the result of inter-institutional 
cooperation, having CONANI provide the impetus for child 
labor law modifications is a departure from the norm, i.e. 
the Ministry of Labor would be expected to spearhead 
modifications of any labor-related laws.  However, the 
Ministry of Labor remains a committed and supportive 
institution of all GODR efforts to eliminate the worst forms 
of child labor and is still the focal point to execute GODR 
anti-child labor programs. End Note) 
 
B) Whether the country has adequate laws and regulations for 
the implementation and enforcement of proscriptions against 
the worst forms of child labor? 
 
5. The legal remedy to combat child labor is mostly through 
impositions of fines.  Article 720 of the Dominican Labor 
Code explains the penalties imposed for all labor violations 
and outlines a graduated scale of penalties.  Child labor 
violations fall at the most severe end of the scale providing 
for the most costly fines.  The fine for violating work age 
requirements ranges from seven to twelve times the minimum 
wage per underage employee.  Current monthly minimum wage, 
referred to locally as salarios minimos, is RD$3,890 
(approximately US$122) outside free zones and RD$2,815 
(approximately US$88) inside free zones.  Jail sentences can 
be imposed for the most serious violations of the labor code. 
 The National Police and Attorney General,s Office usually 
get involved in more egregious cases involving potential 
criminal penalties. 
 
6. As mentioned in previous reports, universal education is 
required and obligatory through primary school.  However, 
there are currently no legal mechanisms to induce parents or 
guardians to send children to school after this point. 
According to education rights NGO Educa, 26 out of every 100 
students that complete primary school finish middle school; 
16% of Dominican children 6-15 years of age never even see a 
classroom. 
 
C) Whether the country has established formal institutional 
mechanisms to investigate and address complaints relating to 
the worst forms of child labor? 
7. As a result of the newly signed Minor,s Code, CONANI will 
now assist the Ministry of Labor in implementing child labor 
laws and regulations (see paragraph 4).  The Ministry of 
Labor assigns labor inspectors, more than 200 total, to each 
of the 31 provinces and the National District (which covers 
Santo Domingo).  Ironically, the three provinces where the 
GODR targets its most intensive programs to eradicate child 
labor (Azua, Constanza and San Jose de Ocoa) are where 
inspectors are few in number--two two, and one, respectively. 
 Child labor inspections are not distinct from monthly, 
general labor inspections.  As such, no separate budget is 
specifically allocated for investigating exploitative child 
labor cases.  The Ministry of Labor keeps broad labor 
inspections statistics on its website.  In the province of 
Azua, for example, there were twelve labor inspections in 
June 2003 in which six were found to involve child labor and 
two resulted in fines.  Child labor, especially in the 
poorest and most marginalized Dominican communities, is 
socially accepted as a means of economic survival rather than 
an abuse of a child,s human rights.  Thus, it is not common 
practice to submit complaints against an &industry8 for 
violating child labor laws. 
 
D) Whether social programs have been implemented to prevent 
the engagement of children in the worst forms of child labor, 
and to assist in removing children engaged in the worst forms 
of child labor? 
 
8. The Ministry of Labor, in collaboration with ILO-IPEC and 
other labor rights organizations, has implemented very 
successful programs to combat child labor.  The programs 
target children who perform dangerous agricultural work in 
the provinces of San Jose de Ocoa, Constanza and Azua. 
 
9. In the tomato-producing province of Azua where 75% of the 
population is poor, the mechanism to employ child laborers is 
informal.  The tomato industries neither recruit nor directly 
employ child workers--independent tomato producers do.  To 
address this problem, ILO-IPEC with Ministry of Labor support 
launched a child labor eradication program in September 2002 
that includes 48 &salas de tareas8 or study halls among 
seven different schools.  The salas de tareas target at-risk 
children (likely to work in tomato fields) who often come 
from third homes.  It is estimated that the project has 
already prevented 3,000 children from working.  The Ministry 
of Labor also provides workshops for educators about the 
prevention and eradication of child labor in Azua and other 
troubled areas.  Another portion of the program includes 
sensitization classes for parents of at-risk children.  These 
classes are administered by Habitat-Azua with support from 
ILO, the Ministry of Labor and Ministry of Education. 
 
10. The Ministry of Education and the Consejo Nacional en 
contra del Trabajo Infantil (National Directive Committee 
Against Child Labor) continue to share the fundamental task 
of removing children from the labor market and ensuring that 
they attend school.  An example of this collaboration is the 
&School Card Program,8 which gives RD$300 pesos (US$10) 
monthly to marginalized mothers who keep their children out 
of work and in school.  In addition, the Ministry of 
Education provides free school breakfast in every school 
countrywide to help promote school attendance.  The Education 
Ministry district office in Azua is planning to team up with 
ILO-IPEC and the Labor Ministry to develop a 
capacity-building program (within the currently established 
salas de tareas framework) that specifically targets seventh 
and eighth graders (13- and 14-year-olds) who are at risk for 
dropping out of school to work.  The Ministry of Education 
office in Azua is also working to develop community parents\' 
councils to denounce child labor. 
 
11. Commercial sexual exploitation of minors is an aspect of 
child labor in the Dominican Republic.  ILO, in collaboration 
with local NGO Idefa (Instituto de la Familia), plans to 
launch a program in September 2003 in the popular sex-tourism 
destination of Boca Chica (The Tourism Police, Politur, has 
done raids on commercial sexual rings in this area).  It is 
expected that more GODR funds will be allocated for future 
programs that seek to reduce sexual exploitation of minors, 
especially given the new comprehensive Anti-Trafficking in 
Persons Law that was signed August 7, 2003. 
 
E) Whether the country has a comprehensive policy aimed at 
the elimination of the worst forms of child labor? 
 
12. The GODR has a national policy that addresses child 
labor.  This policy was initially spearheaded by the National 
Directive Committee Against Child Labor, which includes 
representatives from the Ministries of Labor, Education, 
Foreign Affairs, and Public Health, as well as the National 
Police and Attorney General,s office, among others.  There 
is also a National Plan to Guarantee the Rights of Children 
and Adolescents that President Mejia signed as an executive 
order in April 2001, when he declared the protection of 
children and adolescents a national priority.  Three primary 
objectives of the National Plan are to promote birth 
registration, prevent sexual abuse and exploitation of 
minors, and to assist youth who commit crimes.  Within the 
framework of the National Plan objectives, a special 
inter-institutional commission was created against the abuse 
and sexual exploitation of minors.  The 2001 executive order 
also established another inter-institutional commission to 
review and modify the original Minors\' Code, Law 14-94.  In 
August 2002, CONANI assumed leadership of this second 
commission to reinvigorate the process of modifying the 
Minors\' Code, which ultimately resulted in the recent passage 
of the new Minors\' Code, Law 136-03 (see paragraph 4). 
 
F) Whether the country is making continual progress toward 
eliminating the worst forms of child labor? 
 
13. The GODR continues to make progress in eliminating the 
worst forms of child labor in the formal sector.  On 
September 9, 2003 the GODR, in cooperation with ILO, will 
launch the Time-Bound Program that will be funded by USDOL. 
This program will raise awareness and capacity building for 
policy implementation of child labor protections, as well as 
develop action programs to target the worst forms of child 
labor.  It is estimated that 2,600 children will directly 
benefit from the program.  The GODR hopes to reduce child 
labor by 25% by 2007. 
 
14. In spite of GODR progress to eliminate the worst forms of 
child labor, most forced child labor in the Dominican 
Republic is not formalized, in the sense that it is uncommon 
to find children working in &sweatshops8 analogous to the 
conditions that may exist in other countries.  Informal child 
labor persists in prostitution, family-owned businesses such 
as small mechanic shops, and other clandestine operations. 
 
15. According to the results of the Ministry of Labor\'s 2000 
National Child Labor Survey, 482,720 Dominican children 
between the ages of 5 and 17 work, at least informally (total 
estimated population for this age group is 2.4 million).  Of 
the 428,720 children that work, 56.2% are less than 14 years 
old; 21.1% are between 14 and 15, and the remaining 22.7% are 
adolescents 16 or older.  Curiously, 89.7% of those that work 
also attend school, and only 10.3% of working children do not 
attend school. 
 
16. In areas of high-level unemployment, families often feel 
pressured to encourage their children to earn supplemental 
income to put food on the table.  Homeless children, 
especially in urban areas, are frequently at the mercy of 
adults who collect them and put them to work begging or 
selling meager goods on the street.  In return for their work 
they are given basic housing.  The ages at which these 
children work, the hours they work, and their failure to 
comply with compulsory school attendance all violate the law. 
 
17. The Government has attempted to eliminate the use of 
children for cutting sugar cane.  However, it is not uncommon 
to see poor Haitian and Dominican children working in the 
cane fields (locally referred to as bateyes) of San Pedro de 
Macoris, for example, with the tacit acceptance of sugar 
companies.  Many undocumented Haitian boys as young as 9 
years old plant sugar, while 14- and 15-year olds have been 
spotted cutting sugar cane.  The Ministry of Education 
maintains that it promotes education for all, regardless of 
nationality, and that birth registration problems persist not 
only for Haitians but for Dominican children as well.  (Note: 
Children can attend school without proof of birth until they 
reach the eighth grade.  At the eighth grade level, which is 
normally reached at age 13 or 14, a birth certificate is 
required to attend.  However, obtaining a birth certificate 
in the DR can be a lengthy, complicated process; birth 
certificates are not administered at the hospital immediately 
after a child is born but by a local registrar (or Justice of 
the Peace).  End Note) 
 
END QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 
 
18. COMMENT: The root of child labor problems in the 
Dominican Republic, as in most countries where child labor 
exists, is poverty.  Since the last report was submitted, the 
exchange rate to the dollar has doubled, from approximately 
RD$18 to the dollar to a high of RD$36 to the dollar in July 
2003.  A worsening economy will surely make the GODR,s 
continued efforts to eliminate the worst forms of child labor 
more difficult.  One of the challenges the GODR faces is the 
fact that there are several committees and commissions 
currently involved in addressing children,s rights and 
labor, but no specific policy to address child labor issues 
alone.  The Ministry of Labor would be well served to 
continue improving its record-keeping capabilities of child 
labor violations and sentences, as well as assign more 
inspectors to at-risk areas for child labor.  The National 
Directive Committee on Child Labor should also work harder to 
posit itself to publicly and actively lead the charge against 
child labor. 
HERTELL 
"
"10290","8/25/2003 16:36","03SANTODOMINGO4432","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE184648","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004432 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, PREL 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 58TH UNGA ATTENDEES STILL 
UNDECIDED 
 
REF: (A) STATE 184648 
 
1. GODR HAS NOT YET DETERMINED WHO WILL ATTEND THE 58TH UNGA. 
 GODR REPORTS THAT IT HOPES TO HAVE ITS DESIGNEES NAMED BY 
AUGUST 29.  THE DELAY IN DESIGNATING ATTENDEES STEMS FROM THE 
RECENT RESIGNATION OF THE GODR\'S FOREIGN MINISTRY\'S 
AMBASSADOR IN CHARGE OF INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS.  POST 
WILL FORWARD INFORMATION AS SOON AS IT AVAILABLE. 
HERTELL 
"
"10350","8/27/2003 17:49","03SANTODOMINGO4522","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03QUITO2530|03QUITO2841|03SANTODOMINGO3863","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004522 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PHUM, KDEM, KJUS, DR, EC 
SUBJECT: ECUADOR EX-PRESIDENT NOBOA NOW IN DOMINICAN 
REPUBLIC 
 
REF: A. QUITO 2841 
     B. SANTO DOMINGO 3863 
     C. QUITO 2530 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY:  The GODR MFA has confirmed that former 
Ecuadorian President Gustavo Noboa arrived in the Dominican 
Republic on August 23 after being granted approval by the GOE 
to travel.  He and his spouse have been staying at the 
Presidential retreat, but are arranging to rent their own 
apartment here.  The document granting Noboa safe passage 
states that the GOE retains the right to request Noboa\'s 
extradition.  Noboa had been living in GODR diplomatic 
residences in Ecuador since July 28 when he first petitioned 
for asylum.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) MFA Americas Director Francia Sencion has confirmed to 
us that former Ecuadorian President Gustavo Noboa was granted 
asylum by the GODR and arrived in the Dominican Republic 
August 23.  Noboa and his wife, Maria Isabel Baquerizo, were 
met by Presidential security at Las Americas airport and 
taken directly to the Presidential retreat in Juan Dolio, 
where they met with President Mejia.  The Ecuadorians have 
been staying there briefly as Mejia,s guests and are in 
process of renting a &small8 apartment here, within their 
limited finances. 
 
3. (U) Noboa had been living in GODR diplomatic residences in 
Ecuador while awaiting the GOE\'s decision on whether it would 
allow him to travel to the Dominican Republic.  The GOE 
granted Noboa\'s request to leave the country, but retained 
the right to request Noboa\'s extradition in the event an 
Ecuadoran court subpoenas him.  However, Sencion said the 
GODR does not consider this hypothetical extradition to be a 
condition of the safe-conduct. 
 
4. (U) All Santo Domingo dailies covered the arrival of the 
Noboa, noting that Presidential security forces would not 
allow them access to Ex-President Noboa on orders from the 
Presidential Palace. 
 
5. (SBU) COMMENT: The arrival of Noboa comes in the same week 
in which President Mejia announced his support for a bill 
which would grant immunity from criminal prosecution to 
former Dominican presidents.  So far there has been no 
linking of the two events in the press. 
 
KUBISKE 
"
"10365","8/28/2003 10:52","03SANTODOMINGO4533","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004533 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, ETRD, OREP, PGOV 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN PRESIDENT TELLS CONG. WELLER HE\'S 
CONFIDENT ON FREE TRADE AGREEMENT 
 
 1.  SUMMARY. Dominican President Mejia told U.S. Congressmen 
visiting Aug 20-24 that prospects are &fine8 for a 
bilateral free trade agreement.  Hosted by the Dominican 
private sector, Cong. Weller (R-Illinois), Cong. Brown 
(R-South Carolina) and Republican staffers stressed the need 
to address U.S. concerns on intellectual property rights and 
agriculture.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.   Congressional Representative Jerry Weller (R-Illinois) 
headed a non-official visit to the Dominican Republic August 
20 ) 24 to meet private sector enterprises and government 
representatives to discuss the prospective free trade 
agreement (FTA) with the United States.  Also visiting were 
Representative Henry E. Brown (R-South Carolina), staffers 
representing Republican U.S. Representatives Hastert of IL, 
Brady of TX, and Blunt of MO, Margarita Cepeda of the 
Dominican American National Roundtable, and Carlos Gonzalez, 
New Hampshire State Representative. 
 
3. During events with the American Chamber of Commerce and 
with a group of Dominican bankers Cong. Weller expressed 
strong support for a US-Dominican FTA. He urged business 
participants to work with the GODR and to seek support for 
the FTA among the business community.  Though both groups 
were generally very positive toward the prospective FTA, some 
participants expressed concern that the GODR might not be 
able to achieve an agreement sufficiently tailored to the 
country,s needs.  A former Ambassador to the United States 
remarked privately that there was insufficient time for the 
local private sector to assess the impact of a FTA on 
specific sectors.  The Dominicans expressed concern that 
elections in both countries might delay the agreement. 
 
4. AmCham members responded enthusiastically to Weller,s 
suggestion to assess the impact of the agreement on their 
local operations and to inform U.S. Congressional leaders 
when their districts had the prospect of increasing exports 
to the Dominican Republic. 
 
SESSION WITH THE PRESIDENT 
 
5.  Dominican President Hipolito Mejia and members of his 
administration welcomed Weller and the delegation during a 
breakfast meeting August 22.  The Congressman thanked the 
GODR for its support for the U.S. on the Middle East Road 
Map, the liberation of Iraq, counter-narcotic efforts, and 
the importance of free trade.  Weller said a FTA would 
further strengthen political and economic relationships 
between the United States and the region.  He acknowledged 
particular sensitivities, including agricultural issues and 
intellectual property rights (IPR).  Cong. Brown (R-SC) 
admonished participants that many jobs were moving from Latin 
America to China and that only by acting together could FTA 
partners prosper.  At the end of the breakfast, when Brown 
asked President Mejia if there was anything he would like to 
ask of the delegation, the President responded with a 
confident, &No!  Everything is fine.8 
 
6.    During the delegation,s visit to the Caribbean 
Industrial Park in Santiago, Carlos Alvarez, President of the 
Santiago Free Zone Association warned of dramatic negative 
results if an FTA were not reached before agricultural quotas 
are eliminated by WTO members.  Cong.  Weller again stressed 
his strong support for a FTA and reiterated his concerns 
about IPR.  He urged the Dominican private sector and the 
GODR to stay focused. 
 
7.    COMMENT. Overall, the congressional delegation visit 
went smoothly.  The sponsors met their objectives of showing 
the U.S. representatives the Dominican dedication to 
negotiating a free trade agreement, the advanced economic 
relationship that already exists, further economic prospects, 
and areas of concern for the negotiations. END COMMENT. 
 
KUBISKE 
"
"10366","8/28/2003 12:06","03SANTODOMINGO4548","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03STATE245508","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004548 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR INR/IAA, WHA/CAR, WHA/PD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BB, BF, DR, GY, JM, PINR, TD, NS 
SUBJECT: CARIBBEAN ISSUES CONFERENCE: EMBASSY SANTO DOMINGO 
RESPONSE 
 
REF: STATE 245508 
 
 1.  (U)  Embassy Santo Domingo strongly supports the 
proposal of a Caribbean issues conference and expects to 
nominate an Embassy participant. 
 
2.  (SBU)  In response to para 8 inquiry concerning possible 
Dominican participants we have the following comments: 
 
- - Frederic Emam Zade, Director of Economic Development of 
the Fundacion Global Democracia Desarrollo, would be an 
appropriate choice for the panel on \"Engines of Growth.\" 
Note that he is close to former President Leonel Fernandez, 
who has future presidential ambitions.  Business phone: (809) 
472-0202 ext 224. 
 
- - Frank Rainieri, Chairman of the Punta Cana Group, could 
ably discuss the touristic investments and development of 
that particular region in the Dominican Republic.  Rainieri 
is close to current President of the Dominican Republic 
Hipolito Mejia.  He would provide a private sector point of 
view.  Business phone (809) 541-2714, 541-2715, ext. 233; in 
Punta Cana 221-2262, business fax (809) 686-0165. 
 
- - A possible alternative voice on tourism might be Ellis 
Perez, Director General of Aerodom, the national airports 
authority.  Perez has extensive experience in the sector, 
served as Subsecretary of Tourism and has had a long career 
in communications.  He has lectured in tourism at the 
university level and could provide a wider view of tourism in 
the Dominican economy.  (Reftel does not indicate whether the 
conference will be entirely in English or whether Spanish 
interpretation is provided; we do not have a record of Perez\' 
English language ability.)  Business phone (809) 472-2030, 
business fax (809) 565-0561. 
 
- - A possible panelist on the final session on \"Migration\" 
might be Juan Artola, chief of mission in Santo Domingo for 
the International Migration Organization.  Artola, from 
Uruguay, has had a leading role in pressing the GODR to pass 
legislation and create mechanisms to deal with immigration 
and to deal with trafficking in persons.  He is fluent in 
English and a good contact of the Embassy.  Business phone 
(809) 732-7121, (809) 566-0430; business fax is (809) 
683-4636, e-mail is iomsdomingo@codetel.net.do 
 
3.  (U)  Embassy has not yet contacted Emam Zade or Rainieri 
but will seek to ascertain their availability. 
KUBISKE 
"
"10384","8/28/2003 18:42","03SANTODOMINGO4553","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE217408","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004553 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM, PREL, MNUC, AORC, KNNP, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN RESPONSE--U.S. APPROACH IN THE FIRST 
(DISARMAMENT) COMMITTEE 
 
REF: STATE 217408 
 
1. Poloffs delivered reftel demarche and non-paper August 26 
to Ambassadors Francia Sencion and Roger Espaillat, Office 
Director and Sub-Director of the Americas Desk at the Foreign 
Ministry.  Sencion said that relevant Foreign Ministry 
offices would review the non-paper and asked for time to 
prepare a response.  Poloffs plan to meet with Sencion and 
Espaillat again next week for follow-up (to be reported 
septel). 
KUBISKE 
"
"10387","8/28/2003 19:19","03SANTODOMINGO4554","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE206381","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 004554 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/27/2013 
TAGS: AORC, PREL, PHUM, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN RESPONSE--U.S. INITIATIVES FOR THE 58TH 
UNGA, PART 2 
 
REF: A. STATE 206381 
 
     B. SANTO DOMINGO 3315 
     C. STATE 184648 
     D. SANTO DOMINGO 4432 
 
Classified By: ECOPOL COUNSELOR MICHAEL MEIGS FOR REASONS 1.5 (B/D) 
 
1. This is an action request ) see para 3. 
 
2. (C) Poloffs delivered demarche (ref A) and non-paper 
August 26 to Ambassadors Francia Sencion and Roger Espaillat, 
Office Director and Sub-Director of the Americas Desk at the 
Foreign Ministry.  Sencion said that relevant Foreign 
Ministry offices are reviewing the non-paper and that she 
would give the Embassy a response, if any, in a follow-up 
meeting next week.  At first glance, neither Foreign Ministry 
official saw any potential problems (as with our previous 
UNGA demarche, ref B).  Post has not yet received the list of 
Dominican UNGA delegates (requested per ref C) and the 
Foreign Ministry Director of International Organizations has 
not been named.  A lot of decision-making has been put on 
hold until Foreign Minister Guerrero Prats returns from 
travel.  However, Sencion said that she would send the list 
of Dominican delegates within a few days. 
 
3. (C) Action Request: Ambassador Sencion inquired about the 
U.S. UNGA delegation.  Post requests a list of U.S. 
delegates, if available and appropriate, to share with the 
Foreign Ministry. 
KUBISKE 
"
"10460","9/2/2003 21:24","03SANTODOMINGO4656","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004656 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EINT, ETRD, DR 
SUBJECT: PARLACEN COURTS THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
 
1. Central American Parliament (Parlacen) President Augusto 
Vela Mena, addressing a joint session of the GODR\'s National 
Congress in Santo Domingo August 27, announced that the 
proposed entry of the Dominican Republic into the System of 
Central American Integration had been forwarded to the 
presidents of the Central American nations for approval. 
Vela Mena, of Guatemala, advocated \"political union\" as a 
means for Central American and Caribbean nations to increase 
their clout in the international arena.  New Dominican Senate 
President Jesus Vazquez Martinez (PRD), in follow-on remarks, 
called for revision of Dominican law to authorize local 
election of Parlacen representatives. 
 
2. Vela Mena asserted that only by acting jointly in trade 
negotiations could Central America and the Caribbean gain 
access to the world\'s biggest markets.  The new speaker of 
the Dominican Chamber of Deputies, Alfredo Pacheco (PRD), 
called on the region to embrace globalization and free trade 
to speed development and reduce poverty.  Senate President 
Vazquez acknowledged the importance of free trade, but 
cautioned that the Caribbean and Central America would need 
\"reciprocity\" from major partners in order to benefit. 
 
3. The joint session kicked off the XII Conference of 
Political Parties of Central America and the Caribbean.  The 
Parlacen delegation, in addition to Vela Mena, included vice 
presidents Rodrigo Samayoa Riva (El Salvador), Gladys de 
Carrasquilla of Panama, Leopoldo Navarro (Nicaragua), 
Fernando Lardizalbal (Honduras), and Soila Rojas de Tejada 
(Dominican Republic). 
 
4. Comment: Both Central American and Dominican 
parliamentarians appeared eager for regional integration. 
The Central Americans\' attitude has evolved since their 
previous opposition to the Dominican Republic\'s proposed 
\"docking\" with CAFTA. 
KUBISKE 
"
"10488","9/3/2003 20:37","03SANTODOMINGO4679","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SANTODOMINGO4249","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 004679 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PINR, DR 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT OF DOMINICAN LEGISLATIVE CHAMBER ALFREDO 
PACHECO OUTLINES AGENDA 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 4249 
 
SUMMARY 
 
1. (SBU) On August 27 newly elected activist Chamber of 
Deputies President Alfredo Pacheco told Charge d,Affaires 
and Poloffs he sets a priority on reforming the Penal and 
Civil Codes. He emphasized ongoing collaboration with new 
Senate President Jesus Vasquez to develop a joint legislative 
agenda to be formally announced soon.  He expects Congressman 
Ramon Radhames Garcia to renounce parliamentary immunity in 
connection with trafficking charges but is unclear on next 
steps if Garcia does not act.  The Chamber,s new session 
officially began August 19 (three days behind schedule) after 
a disorderly effort by rival Rafaela &Lila8 Alburquerque 
and her supporters to prevent Pacheco from assuming 
leadership (reftel).  Pacheco has now taken the helm of what 
is probably the stronger house of the National Congress and 
is setting his own course.  A coalition-builder, Pacheco 
strongly supports modernizing and institutionalizing the 
Congress.  END SUMMARY. 
 
NEW LEADERSHIP MEET AND GREET 
 
2. (SBU) On August 27 new Chamber of Deputies President 
Alfredo Pacheco discussed legislative priorities with Charge 
d,Affaires and Poloffs.  He was accompanied by the other 
principal officers of the house Vice-President Manuel Sanchez 
(PRD); Committee on Foreign Relations President Cristian 
Paredes; Ilana Neumann, Deputy representing Puerto Plata 
(PRD); and Nemencia de la Cruz, Deputy representing Santo 
Domingo (PRD).  Pacheco began by expressing his support for 
female politicians (there are 24 women among 150 deputies) 
and the potential influence Charge could have in promoting 
more female participation in government.  He said that 
although the Chamber,s leadership team is PRD, their views 
differ concerning presidential candidates.  Pacheco also 
acknowledged opponent Lila Alburquerque,s instrumental role 
in promoting respect for female politicians.  He credited her 
for pushing for key legislation that protects women,s 
rights, such as the recently passed law against trafficking 
in persons. 
 
3.  (SBU) Pacheco told Charge that he and Senate President 
Vasquez have consulted and will continue to develop a joint 
legislative agenda.  He mentioned as probable priorities 
reform of Civil and Penal Codes, legislation to 
&regularize8 rent prices and protect property owners, and 
follow-up on a law that would institutionalize a human rights 
ombudsman (Defensor del Pueblo).  Pacheco is keen on free 
trade and globalization.  He strongly supports a free trade 
agreement and concurred with Charge,s idea that future 
congressional delegations include meetings at the Chamber. 
 
WHAT ABOUT RADHAMES GARCIA? 
 
4. (SBU) When asked about his public urging that accused 
alien smuggler Ramon Radhames Garcia renounce his 
parliamentary immunity, Pacheco told the Charge that the 
Chamber has not yet received any written communication from 
Garcia.  He commented that the Dominican constitution is 
vague about the procedures for revoking immunity of an 
accused public official but said he would act following 
receipt of Garcia,s written statement.  Pacheco reiterated 
that ultimately the judiciary has to decide Garcia,s guilt 
or innocence.  He said that public officials )- like other 
persons -- are not above the law and should be prosecuted for 
criminal offenses.  The Charge stressed that the U.S. view 
that the Dominican government has been weak on punishing its 
own and that failure to prosecute corrupt officials could 
adversely affect our bilateral relationship. 
 
COMMENT 
 
5. (SBU) Pacheco comes across as an impressively thoughtful 
and articulate politician.  It is too early to tell whether 
he can deliver on legislation, but he is off to a fast start. 
 He has already begun cleaning house, closing down several 
departments within the Chamber of Deputies which he deemed 
unnecessary.  As many as 300 low-level political appointees 
will lose their jobs as a result of the sweep, and will 
likely be replaced by Pacheco,s own supporters. 
 
6. (SBU) As for the hard-fought campaign to win the Chamber 
presidency, it remains unclear whether Pacheco was involved 
in orchestrating the blackout and noisy demonstrations on 
August 16 (his supporters showed up for the session with 
flashlights).  Embassy will continue developing relations 
with Pacheco and covering significant developments regarding 
alleged alien smuggler Radhames Garcia. 
 
BIO NOTE 
 
7. (SBU) A well-established PRD leader in the Congress, 
Alfredo Pacheco has a strong political base in his home 
neighborhood Cristo Rey (a poor barrio in Santo Domingo). 
From a very young age Pacheco got involved in politics 
through community service with the Catholic Church and as a 
volunteer political activist.  He is well liked by his 
Congressional colleagues and by the general public.  Most 
Dominicans, weary of his predecessor,s four-year reign as 
speaker, seem willing to give him a fair chance to usher in 
legislative change. 
 
8. (SBU) Pacheco is a long-time public servant who has worked 
his way up through the ranks.  At age 44, he has 13 years in 
the Chamber along with prior experience as a city councilman, 
local-level PRD spokesman, and PRD Chamber spokesman.  He has 
already published a booklet about the House of 
Representatives, with a brief summary of major constitutional 
reforms, an explanation of the composition of the House, a 
directory of representatives with personal addresses and 
birth dates, and a list of proposed legislative 2003-04 
agenda items. 
KUBISKE 
"
"10489","9/3/2003 20:43","03SANTODOMINGO4680","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SANTODOMINGO4548|03STATE245508","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004680 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR INR/AA, WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, OTRA, PINR 
SUBJECT: CARIBBEAN ISSUES CONFERENCE: INITIAL DOMINICAN 
RESPONSE 
 
REF: A) STATE 245508 B) SANTO DOMINGO 4548 
 
1. Frederic Emam-Zade of the Fundacion Global Democracia y 
Desarrollo told EcoPol counselor on September 2 that he is 
available to participate in the conference and  panel 
proposed ref a.  He has reserved the dates Oct 9-10 and asks 
for further information concerning the possible invitation 
whenever plans are firm. Emam-Zade took the opportunity to 
describe the activities of the 3-year-old Foundation and to 
express interest in hosting visiting U.S. academics and 
consultants. 
 
2.  Embassy has spoken with office of Frank Rainieri of the 
Punta Cana Group and has learned that Rainieri will probably 
be available later today or tomorrow.  We will advise of his 
response. 
KUBISKE 
"
"10544","9/5/2003 12:58","03SANTODOMINGO4736","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SANTODOMINGO4548|03STATE245508","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004736 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR INR/AA, WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, OTRA, PINR, SNAR 
SUBJECT: CARIBBEAN CONFERENCE: RAINIERI RESPONSE AND 
DISGUST WITH CORRUPTION (DOMINICAN REPUBLIC) 
 
REF: A) STATE 245508 B) SANTO DOMINGO 4548 C) SANTO 
 
     DOMINGO 4680 
 
1. (SBU) Dominican businessman Frank Rainieri told EcoPol 
counselor on Sept 4 that he is interested and potentially 
available to participate in the CSIS conference on the 
Caribbean.  He has noted this in his agenda and awaits 
further information.  Having surveyed the agenda, he asked 
about the format of his participation; EcoPol counselor 
suggested that given the time available, he would probably be 
asked for a 10-15 minute presentation, with availability to 
questions toward the end of the session. 
 
2.  (SBU) Rainieri said that he was pleased with the Aug 29 
piece in the NY Times on his enterprise (World Business: \"A 
Different Standard of Living: Dominican Resort is Community 
Project for Developers\") but that it wouldn\'t get any play in 
the Dominican Republic.  (The article reports his retort to 
President Mejia\'s teasing: \"Excuse me, but we pay millions in 
taxes and not one cent is invested here.  The ones who do not 
pay taxes are your friends.  Here, political friendships are 
the source of privilege.\")  He said that he had taken a copy 
to that afternoon\'s meeting of the Monetary Board, where he 
is one of twelve members.  Mejia\'s daughter saw him passing 
it to a friend, got up and came around the table with a 
inconsequential comment, clearly checking to identify the 
document.  \"They\'ve read it in the Palace and they don\'t like 
it,\" he commented. \"We are a little more exposed than we like 
-- my wife appeared in a seven-page article in Hola! this 
week\" (Hola is a celebrity magazine published in Spain, 
France, and the UK). 
 
3.  (SBU)  Rainieri says that he has been carrying around his 
letter of resignation from the Monetary Board, given his 
disgust with the inaction on the banking scandals, and he 
intends to update it.  He has not decided whether to quit the 
Monetary Board in disgust.  He expressed at length his 
disgust with cronyism in government, which hides corruption 
and promotes impunity. 
 
4.  (U)  He introduced EcoPol counselor to Diogenes Checo, 
Executive Director of the NGO \"Aprenda,\" set up by the Punta 
Cana Group and associates to promote prevention of drug use. 
Rainieri wants to continue coordination with the USG on this 
topic.  Checo described Aprenda\'s efforts to educate company 
personnel departments to elaborate and apply anti-drug 
policies and to train employees.  He said that efforts had 
begun to sensitize staffs of participating banks about the 
legal consequences of accepting funds tied to drug 
trafficking and to orient supervisors of export firms about 
ways to detect and prevent smuggling to the United States. 
KUBISKE 
"
"10584","9/8/2003 11:22","03SANTODOMINGO4760","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE254587","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004760 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KNNP, MNUC, PARM, PREL 
SUBJECT: PSI STATEMENT OF INTERDICTION PRINCIPLES DELIVERED 
TO GODR 
 
REF: SECSTATE 254587 
 
 1.  (U) Per reftel, Poloff delivered the text of the 
Statement of Interdiction Principles agreed by the 
Proliferation Security Initiative participants to Ambassador 
Rogert Espaillat, Sub-Director of the GODR Americas Desk on 
September 5.  The Ambassador had no immediate comment and 
indicated the Statement would be reviewed by the relevant 
Foreign Ministry offices.  Espaillat stated that he and 
Americas Desk Director, Ambassador Francia Sencion, should be 
prepared to comment on the text next week.  Substantive 
comment will be reported in septel. 
KUBISKE 
"
"10590","9/8/2003 13:37","03SANTODOMINGO4763","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004763 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), WHA/PPC (FALLS), G/TIP 
(LINDERMAN) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PHUM, KDEM, KJUS, DR 
SUBJECT: GODR LAUNCHES CAMPAIGN AGAINST COMMERCIAL SEXUAL 
EXPLOITATION OF MINORS 
 
 
1.  On August 27 the GODR launched a hard-hitting campaign 
against commercial sexual exploitation of minors.  Billboards 
in beach areas will bear the message, \"In the Dominican 
Republic, we protect our treasures.  Our beaches, mountains, 
monuments and our most precious treasure: our children.\" The 
displays have already appeared in local press. 
 
2.  Commercials warning abusers about jail time for offenders 
and traffickers will soon hit the airwaves.  Brochures 
promoting a child abuse prevention hotline and raising 
awareness of sexual exploitation already have been 
distributed with help from the National Association of Hotels 
and Restaurants (ASONAHORES).  The Ministry of Public Health 
has also released a publication explaining the 
inter-institutional commission\'s responsibilities to prevent 
abuse, protect victims and prosecute criminals.  This 
multifaceted campaign is another step in the GODR\'s efforts 
to address issues of trafficking in persons and  acknowledges 
the government\'s responsibility for proactive moves to 
protect children\'s human rights. 
 
3.  The GODR organism responsible for the campaigns is the 
Inter-institutional Commission Against the Abuse and 
Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children and Adolescents. 
Vice-President (and Minister of Education) Milagros Ortiz 
Bosch attended the kick-off.  This commission, led by NGO 
Idefa (Institute of the Dominican Family), includes 
representatives from the Ministries of Foreign Relations, 
Education, Labor, Women, and Tourism, the National Police, 
and the Attorney General\'s office among others.  Local 
partner ILO-IPEC (with financial backing from the US 
Department of Labor) and UNICEF are campaign sponsors along 
with the governments of Italy and Germany. 
HERTELL 
"
"10597","9/8/2003 15:42","03SANTODOMINGO4765","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE254589","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004765 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, KIPR 
SUBJECT: WTO CANCUN MINISTERIAL:  DOMINICAN SUPPORT FOR 
PREVENTING GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS FROM DISRUPTING THE 
AGRICULTURE TALKS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 254589 
 
    THE GODR HAS PROVIDED ITS ASSURANCES THAT IT WILL SUPPORT 
THE UNITED STATES IN RESISTING EU EFFORTS TO DISCUSS 
GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS (GIs) IN AGRICULTURE COMMITTEE 
MEETINGS IN CANCUN SEPTEMBER 10-14.  IN RESPONSE TO REFTEL 
TALKING POINTS, SUB SECRETARY OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE HUGO 
RIVERA CALLED DOMINICAN ALTERNATE AMBASSADOR TO THE WTO 
CLAUDIA HERNANDEZ TO DISCUSS THE GODR\'S POSITION.  HERNANDEZ 
AND RIVERA SAID THAT THE GODR WOULD OPPOSE DISCUSSION OF GIS 
IN THE AGRICULTURE COMMITTEE, NOTING THAT THE DOMINICAN 
REPUBLIC AGREED WITH THE UNITED STATES\' ON THIS ISSUE. 
HERTELL 
"
"10639","9/10/2003 12:32","03SANTODOMINGO4834","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE253144","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004834 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EB/TRA/OTP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR, ECON 
SUBJECT: CIVAIR: DOMINICAN RESPONSE TO DEMARCHE ON ICAO 
ELEVENTH AIR NAVIGATION CONFERENCE, SEPTEMBER 22-OCTOBER 3, 
MONTREAL, CANADA 
 
REF: SECSTATE 253144 
 
1.   On September 9, econoff delivered reftel on key issues 
regarding the upcoming International Civil Aviation 
Organization Eleventh Air Navigation Conference to Director 
General Carlos Alvarez Guzman of the General Directorate for 
Civil Aviation.  Director Guzman told econoff that the 
Dominican Republic plans on sending a representative to the 
conference and to await further information once he has 
reviewed the key issues.  Post will report any substantive 
responses. 
HERTELL 
"
"10697","9/12/2003 19:11","03SANTODOMINGO4915","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004915 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR - GILROY, MCISAAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, PGOV 
SUBJECT: FORMAL PACT: CIVIC LEADERS TO MONITOR DOMINICAN 
ELECTIONS 
 
 
1. (U) A ceremony including President Mejia, other 
presidential candidates, GODR officials, business and union 
leaders, and the diplomatic corps, held September 8 at the 
Catholic University in Santo Domingo, formally approved a 
non-government committee (\"comision de seguimiento\") of nine 
academic and business notables to monitor the preparation and 
execution of presidential elections scheduled for May 16. 
The committee was tasked with following the work of the 
Central Election Board (Junta Central Electoral - JCE) in 
organizing the elections and tallying results, to ensure \"a 
free, transparent, 
credible, and participative electoral process, without 
distortions or irregularities.\"  The committee will be 
chaired by Catholic University Rector Monsignor Agripino 
Nunez Collado, who has served as a political mediator in 
previous campaigns. 
 
2. (U) President Mejia promised that his administration would 
&not place any obstacle to the success of the day of 
dialogue\" and that \"from the National Palace there will be no 
mischief of any sort\" (with regard to the elections).  Local 
press ran photos of Mejia embracing one of his rivals for the 
PRD nomination, party president Hatuey De Camps, and shaking 
hands with former president and main political adversary 
Leonel Fernandez (PLD). 
 
3. (U) The meeting also approved a \"declaration of 
commitments\" by the same political parties, private sector 
groups, and other institutions which have been engaged since 
last October in a \"national dialogue\" to draft a national 
development agenda.  The declaration outlined objectives for 
political, institutional, electoral, economic, and social 
development.  Publication of the full agenda was promised for 
March, in time for it to be incorporated into the parties\' 
platforms before the elections. 
 
4. (SBU) JCE President Luis Arias, in a subsequent 
conversation with the Ambassador (to be reported septel), 
said the ceremony had \"contributed something\" to reducing 
controversy and the monitoring committee would be able to 
verify that the JCE is doing its job properly.  Arias cited 
his \"positive experience\" with past election monitoring 
committees and recalled that business members had recruited 
computer experts for the JCE.  However, he warned that the 
committee\'s role \"is not to supplant but to collaborate with\" 
the JCE.  The Ambassador responded to Arias and later 
remarked to the press that the committee is a tremendous step 
forward for dialogue and transparency and will give the 
people more confidence in the electoral process and reduce 
tensions.  In a separate meeting, ex-president Fernandez 
agreed with the Ambassador that the new committee deserves 
support, but asserted that the JCE is \"not trustworthy\" 
(other topics septel). 
 
5. (SBU) Comment: The monitoring committee was launched amid 
rising concern over the fairness of the electoral process 
that will culminate in May.  It follows a 20-year tradition 
in the Dominican Republic of civic oversight of the electoral 
process.  Opposition parties such as the PLD (report septel) 
have criticized what they see as a heavily pro-PRD bias at 
the JCE, military meddling in the campaign, use of government 
resources to advance President Mejia\'s candidacy, and a 
possibility of violent demonstrations.  Mejia,s ambitions 
for reelection against the wishes of other PRD leaders and 
his dwindling popularity -- an effect of the nation\'s 
economic problems -- have fueled suspicion that the President 
will resort to chicanery.  The committee of notables will 
help to assuage these fears. (There are encouraging immediate 
precedents: Dominican elections since 1996 were judged by 
international observers to have been free of serious 
irregularities.) 
HERTELL 
"
"10736","9/15/2003 13:05","03SANTODOMINGO4930","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 004930 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/15/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PHUM, SMIG, DR 
SUBJECT: STORY OF HAITIAN CADAVERS ALONG BORDER STILL 
UNCLEAR 
 
Classified By: ECOPOL COUNSELOR MICHAEL MEIGS FOR REASONS 1.5 (B/D) 
 
1. (C) The Dominican Committee on Human Rights announced on 
September 3 that approximately 14 Haitian bodies had been 
discovered in Pedernales, a province along the 
Dominican-Haitian border.  Virgilio Almanzar, chairperson of 
the committee, told Poloffs that he personally saw only 7 
skeletons during a recent trip to the site, but expected to 
find more on a follow-up visit next week.  Almanzar confirmed 
that the Attorney General,s office in cooperation with Armed 
Forces officials would send a team to the border to 
investigate the murder allegations.  The details of what 
happened remain sketchy.  During a September 10 meeting with 
Poloffs, Almanzar claimed that one of the female victims had 
been sexually assaulted before being killed.  However, 
Almanzar also admitted that two of the victims had died of 
hunger or dehydration, and wild dogs had eaten some of the 
bodies. 
 
2. (C) Almanzar said Army officers along the border 
frequently accept bribes in determining which Haitians should 
or should not be allowed entry into the Dominican Republic, 
an issue that has been covered in Human Rights Reports. 
According to Almanzar, some Army officers known to 
assassinate Haitians are also drug traffickers and pay off 
Dominican military intelligence officials to keep their jobs. 
 
3. (C) Comment:  Even though he is a respected human rights 
consultant in civil society, Almanzar rarely produces hard 
evidence to support his allegations.  That said, it is 
difficult to gather solid information from any source on 
Haitian migrants given the porous border situation and a 
culture permeated by corruption. 
 
HERTELL 
"
"10746","9/15/2003 19:39","03SANTODOMINGO4943","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE258046","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004943 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, ASEC, EAIR, DR 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE ON AVIATION THREAT -- DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
 
REF: STATE 258046 
 
1.  EcoPol chief and Econoff delivered subject demarche on 
September 9 to Director General of Civil Aviation Carlos 
Alvarez, who undertook to convoke directors of airports in 
the Dominican Republic.  Alvarez suggested further points of 
contact, which Embassy is pursuing. 
 
2.  Embassy has prepared letter requesting closer cooperation 
on aviation security, warning of the catastrophic effect on 
tourism to the Caribbean of any terrorist hijacking which 
might occur in the area.  Letter includes specific request 
that all airport officials be instructed that airline 
personnel have the authority and legal obligation to refuse 
to carry undocumented or improperly documented persons. 
Letter cites specific cases from mid-August, in which 
intruders were necessarily aided by airport personnel and 
asks for investigation and prosecution of those abetting 
undocumented potential migrants.  Embassy is sending letter 
on September 16 to directors of all airports, immigration, 
customs, and airport security services. 
HERTELL 
"
"10747","9/15/2003 19:59","03SANTODOMINGO4944","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 004944 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FRC FOR RPSO PROCUREMENT OFC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/15/2023 
TAGS: ASUP, AMGT, KSLG 
SUBJECT: PURCHASE OF COMPUTER EQUIPMENT FOR THE CAA 
 
Classified By: Cynthia Ruby Tobal, IPO, Reason:  1.5(G) 
 
1.  (U) Post submits the following information for the 
purchase of 
         unclassified computer equipment to be used in the 
CAA. 
 
2.  (C)  HP SCANJET 8250 DIGITAL FLATBED SCANNER (C9932A) 
         Specifications and warranty. 
         Unit Cost:  $899.99   quantity: (1) 
         Total Cost:  $899.99 
 
 
3.  (U)  $899.99  DIGITAL SCANNER Fiscal Data: 
         19301130000-00-4116-343257-2112-3151 
 
4.  (U)  $135.00 Shipping & Handling: 
19301130000-00-4116-343257-2112-2288 
 
5.  (C)  Please provide ordering and shipping status when 
known.  Ship via Diplomatic 
         Pouch,  ATTN:  AMERICAN EMBASSY SANTO DOMINGO FOR 
IPO. 
HERTELL 
"
"10774","9/16/2003 19:29","03SANTODOMINGO4990","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SANTODOMINGO4415|03SANTODOMINGO4763","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 004990 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), ALSO DOL MARCIA EUGENIO, DOL 
MIRELLISE VAZQUEZ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PHUM, ELAB, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC ESCALATES EFFORTS AGAINST CHILD 
LABOR 
 
REF: A. SANTO DOMINGO 4763 
     B. SANTO DOMINGO 4415 
 
SUMMARY 
 
1. (U) On September 9 the Dominican Republic became the 
second country in Latin America to launch a US Department of 
Labor-funded Time Bound Program as part of an ongoing effort 
to eradicate the worst forms of child labor.  The launch 
comes on the heels of an aggressive national campaign, 
recently announced, against commercial sexual exploitation of 
minors (ref A).  The 3.5 million-USD Time Bound Program will 
target three high-risk sectors across eight provinces prone 
to child labor: sexual tourism, hazardous agriculture and 
informal urban work.  By 2007, the DR plans to reduce these 
prioritized forms of child labor by 25%.  What is most 
telling is the Dominican Ministry of Labor,s enthusiastic 
energy to take on this initiative, as well as community 
commitment to see it through.  The Time Bound initiative 
follows the recent enactment of a revised Minors, Code to 
protect children,s human rights and a new Anti-Trafficking 
in Persons law that penalizes commercial sex offenders (ref 
B). End Summary. 
 
USDOL BOLSTERS EFFORTS AGAINST CHILD LABOR 
 
2. (U) US Department of Labor (USDOL) Acting Director of 
International Child Labor Programs Marcia Eugenio and 
International Relations Specialist Mirellise Vazquez visited 
the Dominican Republic September 7-10 to help launch the Time 
Bound Program.  Minister of Labor Milton Ray Guevarra, a 
staunch advocate of eliminating child labor, has made this a 
priority in domestic policy.  The Ministry of Labor organized 
an emotionally charged ceremony that included a children,s 
art display and a drama, &Yes to education, no to child 
labor,8 performed by young girls and boys from Azua (a 
province where USDOL is already funding a child labor 
project). 
 
3. (U) Ambassador Hertell in his remarks underscored USG 
support for the fight against child labor and recognized GODR 
efforts to date.  The DCM, Ecopol Counselor, Poloffs and 
USAID officers also attended.  Other participants in the 
September 9 ceremony included USDOL partner International 
Labor Organization/International Program for the Elimination 
of Child Labor (ILO/IPEC) Director Frans Roselaers, ILO/IPEC 
Local Chief Technical Advisor Laetitia Dumas, President 
Mejia,s sister Isabel Mejia de Grullon -- who heads local 
NGO CONANI (National Council for Children) and DevTech 
Systems local contractor Dr. John Helwig.  USDOL recently 
awarded DevTech the 3.5 million USD grant to help implement 
the Time Bound program, which includes an education component 
targeting children involved in commercial sexual 
exploitation, hazardous agriculture and informal urban work. 
 
EDUCATION KEY TO CHILDREN VULNERABLE TO CHILD LABOR 
 
4. (U) USDOL Eugenio and Vazquez visited the tomato-producing 
province of Azua to promote the Time Bound Program. 
Approximately 20% of children in Azua who do not regularly 
attend school are forced to repeat a grade.  Eugenio 
emphasized the importance of education in meetings with local 
community leaders.  A highlight of the Azua site visit was 
the ribbon-cutting ceremony, attended by approximately 100 
school children and teachers, opening a library in a 
neighborhood currently receiving USDOL assistance.  The 
teachers appeared to be sincerely committed to keeping 
children in school.  They told Eugenio and Vazquez that when 
their students fail to show up at the special classrooms 
funded by USDOL, the teachers personally visit parents to 
verify that the children are not tomato picking in the fields. 
 
5. (SBU) In a separate meeting with a local Habitat for 
Humanity affiliate, Ministry of Labor inspectors, the Azua 
District Director of Education, local Ministry of Agriculture 
officials and other community workers, Eugenio and Vazquez 
got a bird,s eye view of how to prevent child labor 
utilizing community-owned initiatives.  Despite a few 
defensive comments from the agriculture officials (who did 
not want to be perceived as promoting use of child 
tomato-pickers), the officials seemed willing to eradicate 
child labor.  The local District Director of Education 
requested continuation of USDOL funding, without which she 
says her objectives will be almost impossible to achieve. 
Eugenio and Vazquez urged participants to seek local 
government assistance for micro-enterprises that target poor 
families.  Both also emphasized the importance of changing 
traditional attitudes that it is acceptable for children to 
work to put food on the table. 
 
COMMENT 
 
6. (SBU) The Time Bound Program launch is the latest step in 
the GODR,s proactive policy to address the problem of child 
labor.  The next challenge will be to foster teamwork between 
the Ministries of Labor and Education in implementing the 
program.  Cooperation between the two ministries will become 
increasingly difficult in the run up to the May 2004 
presidential elections, since the Minister of Labor backs 
President Mejia,s re-election bid and the Minister of 
Education/Vice-President Milagros Ortiz Bosch seeks the 
ruling party,s nomination. Local partners, particularly 
ILO/IPEC and contractor DevTech Systems, will also have to 
work together as a team rather than compete.  Fortunately the 
GODR has already set the tone with other successful pilot 
projects, for example significantly reducing child labor in 
the coffee-producing province of Constanza.  To sustain the 
momentum, officials and NGOs will have to continue to 
collaborate in local communities--in spite of the looming 
election and other distractions. 
HERTELL 
"
"10791","9/17/2003 12:34","03SANTODOMINGO5003","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SANTODOMINGO4915","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005003 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: PLD PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION CONCERNS IN THE 
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 4915 
 
 1. (SBU)  SUMMARY.  Leaders of the leading opposition party, 
the Dominican Liberation Party (PLD), have raised with us 
three concerns about upcoming presidential elections in the 
Dominican Republic:  doubts about the impartiality of the 
Junta Central Electoral (JCE ) Central Election Commission), 
alleged interference of the military in the campaign, and the 
need for international election observers.  The politicians, 
in a meeting September 8, spoke with one voice and appeared 
professional and well organized, in contrast to the current 
fractious behavior of the ruling PRD and the continuing 
schism in the opposition PRSC.  PLD is confident that its 
candidate, former President Leonel Fernandez, will win the 
election.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (SBU)  PLD Secretary General Reinaldo Pared Perez and 
three other top party officials told EcoPol Counselor and 
poloffs that PLD candidate, former president (1996-2000) 
Leonel Fernandez has excellent prospects for the May 2004 
presidential election.  The leaders accused the Central 
Election Commission (JCE) of being biased in favor of the 
ruling Dominican Revolutionary Party (PRD).  They said that 
the PRD has six of the nine judges on the commission and 
controls each JCE chamber, one charged with overseeing 
election logistics and the other responsible for resolving 
disputes or allegations of electoral irregularities.  The PLD 
is demanding non-partisan oversight of both branches. 
(Comment: The JCE has told us the administrative preparations 
are on schedule, but much remains to be done.  End comment.) 
 
 
3. (SBU)  PLD campaign coordinator Francisco Javier Garcia 
Fernandez denounced incidents of military involvement in the 
campaign, contrary to the Dominican constitution.  He showed 
photos of uniformed soldiers removing PLD campaign signs and 
flags, allegedly upon the order of a senior officer linked to 
the Dominican army commander, Chief of Staff Radhames 
Zorrilla Ozuna, a presidential appointee.  The PLD officials 
cited recent political statements by the army and navy 
chiefs.  Garcia speculated that the military could become 
involved in the election at President Mejia,s request, along 
the lines of the tactics of President Chavez in Venezuela. 
(Comment:  This was hyperbole.  There is no indication the 
Dominican Republic is headed down the Venezuelan path.  End 
comment.) 
 
4. (SBU)  Secretary General Pared and his colleagues 
requested the Embassy\'s assistance in securing international 
election observers for the election next May.  They advocated 
an observer presence as early as six months ahead, rather 
than the usual few days in advance of the balloting (\"last 
week, if possible\").  They asserted that the sooner the 
observers arrive, the less likely it would be that President 
Mejia would use questionable or even illegal tactics to win. 
 
5. (SBU)  Despite their concerns, the PLD officials were 
confident that Leonel Fernandez would win the elections. 
Garcia cited voter preference polls showing Fernandez with 56 
pct to 62 pct regardless of who runs against him as the PRD 
candidate.  In one campaign scenario, with the third party 
PRSC supporting the PRD candidate, Fernandez would garner 82 
pct of the vote. 
 
6. (SBU)  PLD officials are concerned that Mejia will 
misappropriate government resources, especially money, 
personnel and vehicles, in order to favor his faction of the 
PRD.  Officials also raised the possibility of violent 
demonstrations during the campaign. Any violence, the PLD 
officials believe, would be due to the country\'s economic 
woes and dissatisfaction with the electoral process. 
 
7. (SBU)  COMMENT.  The PLD is a well-organized party, with a 
coherent and clear message, and Fernandez ) whose previous 
tenure is remembered as a time of economic prosperity - is a 
strong candidate.  In contrast, the ruling but fractious PRD 
continues to argue over how to choose its presidential 
candidate. (Septel will report on the Ambassador\'s meeting 
with Fernandez.) The PLD\'s election concerns are valid but 
probably overdrawn, provided the JCE allows access to a newly 
constituted election oversight committee of civic leaders 
(reftel) and authorizes international election observers at 
the proper time.  Septel will report on JCE activities. END 
COMMENT. 
HERTELL 
"
"10811","9/17/2003 17:57","03SANTODOMINGO5020","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE256553","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005020 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR IO/SHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC, PHUM, SOCI 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC NGO PEDOPHILIA CERTIFICATION 
 
REF: SECSTATE 256553 
 
1.  INSTRAW is an unfunded UN-affiliated research 
organization that has loose connections with six NGOs.  All 
six NGOs work to promote women\'s issues.  The NGOs are known 
to the mission and none of them is known as a group whose 
mission includes the promotion of pedophilia. 
 
2.  INSTRAW does not grant official status, accreditation, or 
recognition to any organization which promotes and condones 
or seeks the legalization of pedophilia or has subsidiaries 
or member organizations that do.  Embassy provides this 
certification pursuant to section 102(g) (Pedophilia). 
 
3.  Embassy contact is Angela Kerwin, phone 809-731-4303; fax 
809-686-4038; email kerwinam@state.gov. 
 
4.  Total staff time devoted to complying with this request 
was three hours. 
HERTELL 
"
"10813","9/17/2003 20:11","03SANTODOMINGO5035","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE184648","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005035 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, OTRA, KSEP, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC UNGA ATTENDEES 
 
REF: STATE 184648 
 
 1.  The GODR has provided the following information on its 
delegation to the 58th General Assembly of the United Nations: 
 
A.  Head of State, President Hipolito Mejia, does not plan to 
attend. 
 
B.  Head of Government, President Hipolito Mejia, does not 
plan to attend. 
 
C.  Foreign Minister Francisco Guerrero Prats, Secretary of 
State for Foreign Relations, will attend and will head the 
Dominican delegation.  No arrival or departure dates are 
available at this time.  It is unknown if he will be 
accompanied by his spouse.  Spanish language interpretation 
would be necessary for bilats. 
 
D.  Under Secretary of State for Foreign Relations, Miguel A. 
Pichardo Olivier, will attend.  No arrival or departure dates 
are available at this time.  It is unknown if he will be 
accompanied by his spouse. 
 
E.  Foreign Ministry officials in charge of IO affairs who 
will be in attendance are as follows: 
 
i.  Permanent Representative to the UN, Ambassador Marino 
Villanueva Callot. 
 
ii.  Ambassador in charge of UN/OAS and international 
conferences, Jesus Maria Hernandez. 
iii.  Assistant Ambassador on UN/OAS and international 
conferences, Rhadys Abreu de Polanco. 
 
iv.  Assistant Ambassador for Economic Issues to the 
Permanent Representative to the UN, Enriquillo Del Rosario. 
 
No arrival or departure dates are available at this time for 
any of the delegates listed above.  Septel will provide 
information on whether any or all of the delegates will be 
accompanied by their spouses and whether Spanish language 
interpretation would be necessary for bilats. 
HERTELL 
"
"10847","9/18/2003 19:04","03SANTODOMINGO5057","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE268287","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005057 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, KPAL, DR 
SUBJECT: URGENT DEMARCHE ON UN ACTION ON THE MIDDLE EAST 
DELIVERED TO GODR 
 
REF: SECSTATE 268287 
 
 1.  Reftel talking points were delivered to Ambassador 
Francia Sencion and Rogert Espaillat, Director and 
Sub-Director of the GODR\'s Americas Desk, on September 18. 
The Ambassadors had no immediate comment and indicated the 
talking points would be reviewed by the relevant Foreign 
Ministry offices. 
HERTELL 
"
"10848","9/18/2003 19:23","03SANTODOMINGO5058","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005058 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR AND EB/TPP/MTA/; 
PLEASE PASS TO USTR/A.DURKIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECIN, ETRD, EAGR, DR 
SUBJECT: GODR: DOMINICANS WERE COOPERATIVE AT CANCUN 
 
 
1.  (SBU) GODR INTERLOCUTORS HAVE ASSURED EMBOFFS THAT THEY 
ENGAGED CONSTRUCTIVELY AND COOPERATIVELY DURING THE SEPTEMBER 
10-14 WTO MINISTERIAL.  ACCORDING TO SECRETARY OF STATE FOR 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS (AND PRESIDENT OF INDOTEL), ORLANDO JORGE 
MERA, AND THE GODR\'S CHIEF AGRICULTURAL NEGOTIATOR, OSMAR 
BENITEZ, THE GODR DID NOT SUPPORT THE POSITION OF DEVELOPING 
COUNTRIES WHOSE DELEGATES HAD WALKED OUT OF THE CONFERENCE. 
 
2.  (SBU) JORGE EXPLAINED THAT IN RESPONSE TO A REQUEST BY 
THE UNITED STATES DELEGATION, HE HAD MADE A PLENARY 
INTERVENTION SUPPORTING THE UNITED STATES ON THE MERIT OF 
SINGAPORE ISSUES.  HE SAID THAT THE DOMINICANS HAD ALSO SHOWN 
FLEXIBILITY ON NON-AGRICULTURAL MARKET ACCESS, ADDING THAT 
THE GODR HAD RAISED LEGITIMATE TECHNICAL QUESTIONS ON 
AGRICULTURAL, BUT HAD NOT IMPEDED DISCUSSIONS.  SUB SECRETARY 
OF AGRICULTURE JESUS DE LOS SANTOS TOLD ECONOFF THAT THE 
DOMINICAN DELEGATION HAD SPOKEN OUT IN FAVOR OF CONTINUING 
THE NEGOTIATIONS. 
 
3.  (SBU) ALSO, THE FOREIGN SECRETARIAT\'S UNDER SECRETARY FOR 
TRADE NEGOTIATIONS SANTIAGO TEJADA TOLD ECONOFF SEPTEMBER 17 
THAT HE HAD BEEN SURPRISED BY THE ABRUPT ENDING OF THE WTO 
MINISTERIAL.  HE SAID THAT HE HAD EXPECTED NEGOTIATIONS TO 
CONTINUE UNTIL LATE SEPTEMBER 14 AND THAT AN AGREEMENT WAS 
WITHIN REACH.  TEJADA SAID THAT HE THOUGHT THE CHAIRPERSON 
HAD ENDED THE MEETING TOO SOON. 
 
4.  (SBU) AGRICULTURAL NEGOTIATOR OSMAR BENITEZ TOLD DCM 
SEPTEMBER 17 THAT HE DID NOT VIEW THE MINISTERIAL AS A 
FAILURE.  HE EXPLAINED THAT ALTHOUGH THE OBJECTIVES HAD NOT 
BEEN MET, THERE WAS SIGNIFICANT PROGRESS TOWARD AGREEMENT 
THAT COULD SERVE AS THE STARTING POINT DURING THE NEXT WTO 
MEETINGS.  HE ALSO BELIEVED THAT THE USG AND THE GODR SHOULD 
BE ABLE TO AGREE ON AN APPROACH TO AGRICULTURAL SUBSIDIES, AS 
LONG AS A THERE WOULD BE A SUFFICIENT PHASE-OUT PERIOD FOR 
THE SUBSIDIES TO BE ENDED. 
 
 
HERTELL 
"
"10871","9/19/2003 14:09","03SANTODOMINGO5074","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE260761","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005074 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, DR 
SUBJECT: WSIS/FREEDOM OF THE PRESS; DOMINICAN RESPONSE 
 
REF: SECSTATE 260761 
 
1. Poloff delivered reftel talking points by email and fax to 
Ambassador for Human Rights Anabella de Castro on September 
15.  Talking points were also sent on September 16 to Indotel 
President and Secretary of State for Telecommunications 
Orlando Jorge Mera.  Mr. Mera assured Poloff that he would 
send talking points to Indotel representatives in Geneva. 
According to Ambassador de Castro, Indotel traditionally 
takes the government\'s lead on freedom of the press issues, 
not the Foreign Ministry.  At first glance, neither 
Ambassador de Castro nor Mr. Mera expressed any potential 
problems. 
HERTELL 
"
"10885","9/19/2003 22:29","03SANTODOMINGO5088","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SANTODOMINGO4915|03SANTODOMINGO5003","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 005088 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), USOAS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, PGOV, PREL 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTORAL BOARD MOVING AHEAD 
 
REF: A. (A) SANTO DOMINGO 4915 
     B. (B) SANTO DOMINGO 5003 (NOTAL) 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: Central Electoral Board (\"JCE\") President 
Luis Arias and seven of the eight other electoral judges 
assured the Ambassador on September 9 that -- contrary to 
claims by opposition critics -- preparations for the May 16, 
2004, presidential election in the Dominican Republic were on 
schedule and that registration problems would be resolved. 
The Ambassador welcomed JCE officials\' expressed commitment 
to free, fair,and clean elections.  He also noted a need for 
the JCE to strengthen its credibility and dispel suspicions 
of political bias that might favor President Mejia\'s bid for 
reelection.  Arias told him the GODR welcomed and expected 
international observers, as in past elections.  End summary. 
 
2. (SBU) On September 9 the Ambassador, accompanied by DCM 
and emboffs, met with President of the Dominican Republic\'s 
Central Electoral Board (Junta Central Electoral - JCE) Luis 
Arias, the three judges of the Administrative Chamber which 
will organize and conduct the election, and four of the five 
judges of the Dispute Resolution Chamber (Camara Contenciosa) 
responsible for adjudicating any questions about the vote 
count or allegations of irregularities.  The Ambassador 
emphasized the importance of the JCE\'s work to ensure clean, 
fair, and transparent elections and welcomed JCE members\' 
commitment to the same.  He noted concern by various of our 
political party contacts (reftels) that the JCE is stacked in 
favor of the ruling PRD\'s PPH faction, which backs President 
Mejia\'s pre-candidacy for reelection.  Arias noted that he 
and another judge had served during the previous presidential 
election in 2000, which observers concluded had been free and 
fair.  According to Arias, what matters is \"how the judges 
behave, not their political party affiliation.\"  He, 
Administrative Chamber head Nelson Gomez Arias, and Dispute 
Resolution Chamber head Salvador Ramos all expressed their 
commitment to transparency and correct procedure in the 
election. 
 
3. (SBU) The Ambassador asked whether, as in the past, the 
JCE would accredit international observers to this election. 
Arias, referring to his experience as an alternate JCE judge 
beginning in 1996, replied that it was a \"tradition\" for the 
Dominican Republic to accept observers.  Possible sources 
were the OAS, the UN, and prominent NGOs such as CAPEL, IFES, 
NDI, and/or the Carter Center.  They would arrive anywhere 
from three days to one month before the election.  However, 
it was up to the national government holding the election to 
invite the observers, he emphasized.  The Ambassador stressed 
the USG\'s continuing support for the democratic process. 
Arias said the Embassy \"has much to offer\" to the JCE and 
that he would approve of USG participation as part of the 
international observer presence.  In reply to a question, 
Arias acknowledged receipt of a UNDP proposal for technical 
assistance to the JCE, but indicated the board had not yet 
decided whether to accept the assistance.  (Note: He gave no 
reason for the delay.  End note.) 
 
4. (SBU) Legal changes last year reduced the maximum number 
of voters per polling station to 400, and consequently some 
900,000 voters must go to different stations.  The 
administrative judges explained that 300,000 of the cases 
were already resolved and the voters would receive letters 
informing them of the change.  Another 300,000 would get 
their letters by December and the remainder would go out well 
in advance of election day.  (Note: The JCE expects to 
increase the number of polling places to 12,500 for the 
upcoming election, to accommodate the rise in number of 
voters.  End note.) 
 
5. (SBU) Another issue, regularizing the credentials of 
21,000 voters who have duplicate identification cards 
(cedulas), was also being addressed, he said.  A pilot 
project would enable some 20,000 - 30,000 Dominicans living 
abroad to vote through consulates, but the judges 
acknowledged this would benefit relatively few of the more 
than one million Dominicans living in the US.  The judges 
claimed that the composition of 107 of the 134 municipal 
election boards had been agreed to by local party 
representatives, but said JCE inspectors had to confirm this. 
 Disputes over appointments to 22 local boards remained 
unresolved. 
 
6. (SBU) Comment: Arias assumed the JCE presidency in July, 
replacing Ramon Morel Cerda who had been accused of nepotism, 
resisting reforms, and quarreling with the other judges. 
Opposition contacts have told us that six of the nine current 
judges, including Arias, sympathize with the PRD.  Such 
partisan imbalance is nothing new, and may or may not 
translate into partisan decisions.  In any event, it 
undermines public confidence in the board\'s impartiality. 
Amid the current tension created by Mejia\'s desire to be 
reelected -- a controversial topic for the many Dominicans 
who recall all too well the Balaguer and Trujillo eras -- the 
JCE will need to do a better job of establishing its 
transparency and credibility.  The electoral board will also 
have to perform its task with a majority of inexperienced 
judges and a reformed structure that is so far untested. 
Among its other duties, the JCE will decide which entities 
may send observers, and how many, to the polls. 
HERTELL 
"
"10908","9/22/2003 15:02","03SANTODOMINGO5097","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03STATE254339","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005097 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR NP/CBM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, MNUC, KSCA, ETTC, TSPA, DR 
SUBJECT: ICOC TALKING POINTS DELIVERED TO GODR 
 
REF: STATE 254339 
 
1. Poloffs delivered reftel talking points to Ambassadors 
Francia Sencion and Rogert Espaillat, Director and 
Sub-Director of the Americas desk of the GODR Foreign 
Ministry.  Both were aware of USG interest in the 
International Code of Conduct Against Ballistic Missile 
Proliferation (ICOC) and that the GODR had agreed in 
principle to support the ICOC.  Poloffs stressed the 
importance of the Dominican Republic becoming a subscribing 
member as soon as possible and before the second annual 
meeting of the ICOC subscribing states on October 2-3. 
Ambassadors Sencion and Espaillat said they would review the 
issue. 
HERTELL 
"
"10909","9/22/2003 15:57","03SANTODOMINGO5099","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SANTODOMINGO4548|03SANTODOMINGO4636|03STATE245508","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005099 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR INR/AA, WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA, PGOV, PINR 
SUBJECT: CARIBBEAN CONFERENCE: TRAVEL OF AMBASSADOR HERTELL 
 
REF: A) STATE 245508 B) SANTO DOMINGO 4548 C) SANTO 
     DOMINGO 4680 D) SANTO DOMINGO 4636 
 
1.  (SBU) Ambassador Hans Hertell expects to attend CSIS 
Caribbean Conference on Oct 9-10 as described in ref A. 
HERTELL 
"
"10914","9/22/2003 21:13","03SANTODOMINGO5117","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03REF:STATE266775","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005117 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, KDEM, PGOV, PINS, PREL 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC TO ATTEND DECENTRALIZATION 
MEETING, SEP 24-26 
 
REF: REF: STATE 266775 
 
Poloff delivered talking points (para 6 reftel) to Dr. Tirso 
Mejia-Ricart, Secretary of State (minister) and director of 
the National Council of State Reform.  He confirmed that he 
would represent the Dominican Republic at the Second Meeting 
of Ministers and High-Level Authorities on Decentralization, 
Local Government and Citizen Participation, in Mexico City 
September 24-26. 
HERTELL 
"
"10915","9/22/2003 21:41","03SANTODOMINGO5118","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005118 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR MCISAAC, CA/OCS/ACS/WHA HALDANE, OFDA, 
OBO/PE/DE/CSB DAI OH & HAO BUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CASC, DR, EAIR, EWWT, SENV, SOCI 
SUBJECT: EARTHQUAKE SHAKES DOMINICAN REPUBLIC - NO AMCITS 
REPORTED INJURED 
 
1. At 12:45 a.m. on September 22, an earthquake measuring 6.5 
on the Richter scale struck the Dominican Republic 
approximately nine miles south of the resort town of Puerto 
Plata and 12 miles north of the interior city of Santiago. 
No AmCit deaths or injuries have been reported by the US 
Consular agent in Puerto Plata or other sources.  Embassy 
contacts and local media are reporting two local deaths due 
to heart attacks but \"many\" injuries. 
 
2. Two hospitals in the northern part of the country have 
been evacuated so that officials can assess the structural 
damage to the buildings.  Schools in Santiago, Puerto Plata 
and San Francisco de Macoris are closed, and many offices and 
businesses in the region are closed.  Damage to the highway 
between Puerto Plata and Santiago is being assessed by local 
public works employees.  The Carol Morgan School in Santo 
Domingo, attended by many Mission children, reported no 
damage or injuries. 
 
3. Our contacts in the affected region report major damage to 
some buildings in Puerto Plata, including partial collapse of 
the second story of a government bank; damage to the \"old 
pier\" putting it out of service for the time being; and 
cracks in an airport terminal serving American Airlines, 
which has canceled all flights.  A \"new pier\" is still 
available for vessels putting into the port.  A few 
houses/places of business in both cities collapsed or 
suffered major damage, and more buildings sustained cracks or 
other damage to walls, awnings, and billboards.  The tremor 
awakened many people in Santo Domingo, knocked some pictures 
off walls and some items off shelves. 
 
4.  Several aftershocks, one of which registered 5.1 on the 
Richter scale, were felt in the early morning hours. 
Officials are warning that aftershocks may continue.  An 
emergency number for the Red Cross emergency center is being 
broadcast on local radio and television stations 
(809-472-0909). 
HERTELL 
"
"10940","9/23/2003 16:07","03SANTODOMINGO5135","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SANTODOMINGO4915|03SANTODOMINGO5003","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 005135 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, EFIN, EPET, ETRD, PGOV, PREL, VE 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC ELECTIONS: LEONEL FERNANDEZ ON 
US, VENEZUELA, DOMESTIC ISSUES 
 
REF: A. (A) SANTO DOMINGO 4915 
     B. (B) SANTO DOMINGO 5003 (NOTAL) 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: Former president and presidential 
pre-candidate Leonel Fernandez (PLD) emphasized to the 
Ambassador September 9 the importance of the Dominican 
Republic\'s relations with the United States, commented on the 
Dominican Republic\'s bumpy relations with Venezuela and the 
recent interruption of oil supplies from there, and claimed 
to be the front runner in voter preferences for the May 2004 
elections.  Fernandez reiterated opposition concerns about 
the GODR\'s election preparations, fiscal problems that he 
believes will be left for the next administration to solve, 
and free trade negotiations.  The Ambassador stressed the 
USG\'s interest in a free and fair election, with 
international observers, in strengthening democratic 
institutions, and in completing negotiations quickly on a 
free trade agreement that would integrate the Dominican 
Republic with the Central America Free Trade Agreement 
(CAFTA). End summary. 
 
Relations with the United States 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
2. (SBU) Former president (1996-2000) and declared opposition 
presidential candidate in elections next May, Leonel 
Fernandez, discussed international and domestic issues with 
the Ambassador on September 9 at the spacious new 
headquarters building of Fernandez\'s NGO, Global Foundation 
for Democracy and Development (www.funglode.org).  Fernandez 
declared that he considers the United States the most 
important foreign country for the Dominican Republic\'s 
future.  The Ambassador expressed appreciation for the 
Dominican Republic\'s participation in the Coalition of the 
Willing in Iraq.  Fernandez replied that he strongly supports 
the war on terrorism, but quipped, \"President Mejia\'s 
administration doesn\'t have a monopoly on good relations with 
the United States\" and cited his own prior record in this 
regard.  Fernandez also reviewed various projects that are 
planned or underway between his \"Global Foundation\" and U.S. 
universities and NGOs, mainly in Florida and New York. 
 
Venezuelan-Dominican Relations 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
3. (SBU) Fernandez dismissed as \"exaggerated\" Venezuelan 
President Chavez\'s recent accusation that the GODR was 
condoning local activity by coup plotters seeking to 
overthrow the GOV.  The Venezuelan had based his charges on 
\"inaccurate intelligence,\" and in any case President Mejia 
would have no interest in actions that might jeopardize 
DR-Venezuela relations.  Fernandez characterized former 
Venezuelan president Carlos Andres Perez as a \"very active\" 
anti-Chavez expatriate in Santo Domingo, but claimed that 
Perez is making numerous enemies here and has \"no capacity to 
harm Venezuela.\"  \"I\'m the only friend he has left here,\" 
Fernandez claimed.  Another Chavez adversary, Venezuelan 
businessman Gustavo Cisneros, stirs suspicions in Caracas 
every time he has a meeting at the Casa de Campo resort (in 
La Romana, Dominican Republic), according to Fernandez, but 
Cisneros, he claimed, has limited political clout.  Fernandez 
recalled that Chavez had been \"very upset\" with President 
Mejia for granting political asylum to two Venezuelan 
military officers. 
 
Election Prospects 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
4. (SBU) Fernandez confirmed what we had heard from other 
leaders of his Dominican Liberation Party - PLD (ref B) that 
recent presidential preference polls conducted by the party 
showed Fernandez leading the pack of pre-candidates with some 
60 percent of voter intentions -- far ahead of President 
Mejia (PRD) or Eduardo Estrella (candidate of the Reformist 
Social Christian Party - PRSC).  However, Fernandez repeated 
concerns we have heard from other opposition contacts 
(reftels) that the Central Electoral Board may be biased in 
favor of Mejia\'s reelection bid and is moving too slowly to 
resolve problems with electoral registration and 
organization.  He echoed his party\'s charges that Dominican 
Army chief of staff Radhames Zorrilla Ozuna is illegally 
meddling in the election campaign.  Some opposition critics, 
according to Fernandez, are saying that Mejia believes the 
USG will let him get away with such irregularities because of 
his administration\'s support in Iraq.  The Ambassador 
stressed the USG interest in a free, fair, and transparent 
election and in the strengthening of democratic institutions. 
 
Financial and Trade Issues 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
5. (SBU) The Ambassador raised his concern about the economic 
impact of the BANINTER bank corruption scandal and the USG\'s 
interest in judicial independence and due process in the 
resolution of this case.  Fernandez replied that the PLD 
platform advocates judicial reform, but asserted it would 
have to start \"from zero\" because of lower-level judges\' 
susceptibility to improper influence.  He commented that the 
Central Bank\'s quasi-fiscal deficit resulting from the bank 
collapse would impose a \"terrible\" crunch on government 
finances within a year and that the only solution would be an 
international bond issue.  Fernandez predicted that GODR 
would fail to meet the IMF-imposed deadline of July 2004 for 
a tax reform, which he expected to slip until one to three 
months after a new administration takes office.  When the 
Ambassador asked about prospects for legislative approval for 
the GODR to negotiate a bilateral free trade agreement to 
\"dock\" with the Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) 
and reiterated strong U.S. interest in this proposal, 
Fernandez expressed support, but complained that the PLD\'s 42 
members in the Chamber of Deputies needed to be better 
informed about the talks.  Fernandez also raised agricultural 
subsidies, which he said should be dealt with in technical 
committees (e.g., the Trade and Investment Committee).  He 
said the GODR\'s recent announcement of a 5 percent tax on 
exports and a 2 percent tax on imports should be rescinded to 
boost the nation\'s competitiveness and prepare it for free 
trade.  (Comment: The Senate has subsequently voted against 
the 5 percent export tax, and it is likely to be shelved. 
End comment.) 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
6. (SBU) As a former president, remembered favorably by many 
Dominicans for the nation\'s greater prosperity during his 
tenure, Fernandez appears to be the front-running 
presidential candidate -- but he will meet a tough match 
when, as seems likely, President Mejia settles current 
quarrels within his own PRD and secures the nomination. 
Fernandez also faces unresolved allegations of his financial 
ties to Ramon Baez Figueroa, the imprisoned kingpin of the 
BANINTER scandal, including speculation that the Global 
Foundation\'s lovely new headquarters was built with 
siphoned-off bank funds. 
 
7. (SBU) Fernandez attended elementary and junior high school 
in New York City in the 1960s and feels close ties to the 
United States, despite his leadership of a historically 
leftist party.  He showed little sympathy for Venezuelan 
President Chavez and took a nationalist line against Chavez, 
while also criticizing the Mejia administration for provoking 
the Venezuelan in the handling of the asylum cases.  Now that 
Chavez has publicly confirmed his intention to continue the 
measures he took against the Dominican Republic last month -- 
the oil embargo and withdrawal of the Venezuelan ambassador 
-- opposition leader Fernandez may have little choice but to 
show solidarity with the current GODR on this matter. 
 
8. (SBU) Fernandez\'s comments on financial and trade issues 
may foreshadow the line he will take during the campaign -- 
charges of financial mismanagement against Mejia, who is 
particularly vulnerable during the current economic slump, 
and skepticism on specific aspects of a free trade agreement. 
 His comments on the election campaign are staple rhetoric of 
the PLD -- the leading opposition to President Mejia and the 
PRD -- but also reflect a need for the Central Electoral 
Board to do more to build public confidence in what will 
probably be a generally free and fair electoral process. 
HERTELL 
"
"10942","9/23/2003 20:37","03SANTODOMINGO5154","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 005154 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS USTR, DEPT FOR WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP, ETRD, OVIP, DR 
SUBJECT: FLORIDA GOVERNOR BUSH HITS A HOME RUN ON TRADE 
MISSION TO DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
 
 
1.  Summary.  Gov. Jeb Bush led more than 200 U.S. business 
representatives to Santo Domingo, September 15-17 for the 
annual &Expo USA8 and a full program to promote Miami\'s bid 
to house the permanent secretariat of the Free Trade Area of 
the Americas.  He also expressed support for CAFTA docking. 
GODR VP Milagros Bosch and Trade Secretary Guzman expressed 
interest in the Miami proposal and the Governor received 
enthusiastic support from many leading Dominican 
businesspersons.  &Expo USA8 participants had more than 800 
scheduled business contacts and the Dominican 
Republic-Florida task force set up cooperation between 
educational and academic institutions.  The energetic trip 
was very favorably received in Santo Domingo. End Summary. 
 
2.  Florida Governor Jeb Bush accompanied more than 200 U.S. 
business representatives to Santo Domingo on Sept. 15-17 for 
&Expo USA.8  Business representatives, many new to the 
Dominican market, held more than 800 meetings during the 
trip.  Governor Bush, in addition to promoting trade with 
Florida, advocated free trade and Miami\'s bid to house the 
permanent secretariat of the Free Trade Area of the Americas. 
 The Governor\'s mastery of Spanish made a deeply favorable 
impression.  Leading Dominican businesspersons were generally 
supportive of his proposal for Miami as FTAA secretariat, 
citing the long-standing and significant trade relationship 
between Florida and the Dominican Republic. 
 
DR ATTRACTED TO FAVORING MIAMI OVER PANAMA FOR FTAA 
HEADQUARTERS 
 
3.  In separate meetings, Vice President Milagros Ortiz Bosch 
(head of government while President Mejia was in Europe) and 
Secretary of Industry and Commerce Sonia Guzman told the 
 
SIPDIS 
Governor that the Dominican Republic had already sent a 
letter expressing support for Panama\'s bid for the 
secretariat; however each indicated that there was room for 
 
SIPDIS 
\"flexibility.8  Bosch reminded the Governor that since the 
final decision would be made by consensus, it could in the 
end favor Miami.  Secretary Guzman said she would intercede 
directly with the Panamanians at an appropriate time, an 
offer that pleased the Governor\'s team. 
 
CAFTA DOCKING 
 
4.  Dominican business representatives took the opportunity 
to request the Governor\'s support for a prospective free 
trade agreement (FTA) between the United States and the 
Dominican Republic.  The Governor was positive on the 
subject, calling an FTA a &win-win8 arrangement, while 
making no promises. 
 
NEW INVESTMENT PROJECTS FOR HISPANIOLA 
 
5.  Officials of the American Chamber of Commerce briefed the 
Governor on two projects that will help increase trade 
capacity -- the new Caucedo port operation being developed 
near Las Americas Airport and a joint venture between Grupo M 
of the Dominican Republic and Haiti.  The US$300 million 
Caucedo project will create a new state-of-the-art container 
port facility that aims to increase trade, flexibility, and 
security for Dominican exports.  The joint venture project 
spearheaded by Grupo M aims to create a textile operation 
where factory administration will take place in the Dominican 
province of Dajabon and the manufacturing on the Haitian side 
directly across the border.  The Dominican business community 
expects that these projects as well as other advancements 
will spark an increase in trade and investment with Florida. 
 
HAITI\'S AMCHAM PROMOTES THE HERO ACT 
 
6.  Governor Bush met Haitian AmCham Representatives during 
the first day of his visit.  They described Haiti\'s current 
economic status, requested the Governor\'s support for the 
Haiti Economic Recovery Opportunity (HERO) Act, which was 
introduced to the U.S. House of Representatives Ways and 
Means Committee on February 27, 2003, and officially invited 
him to Haiti\'s Bicentennial Celebration next year.  The group 
claimed that the HERO Act already had the support of most 
Florida representatives and of the Black Caucus.  They were 
concerned that if it did not pass, the Central American Free 
Trade Agreement (CAFTA) and an FTA with the Dominican 
Republic would &seal Haiti\'s economic death.8  The Governor 
agreed to look at the bill but reiterated that Haiti\'s 
current political environment made it difficult to support 
and promote investment in the country. 
 
NEW DOMINICAN-FLORIDAN TIES 
 
7.  On September 16 the Governor witnessed the signing of two 
educational agreements establishing ties between Florida 
universities and Dominican schools.  The first was between 
the Florida Coastal School of Law (FCSL) and Ponificia 
Universidad Catolica Madre y Maestra (PUCMM).  The 
partnership will create a prototype for the study and 
development of international and comparative law on topics of 
immediate concern to the Caribbean.  The second was between 
Florida International University (FIU) and Universidad 
Iberoamericana (UNIBE).  The agreement is part of the efforts 
by the Dominican Republic/Florida Task Force, a cooperative 
effort of the Fundacion Global Democracia y Desarollo 
(FUNGLODE) and FIU,s Latin America and Caribbean Center. 
 
8.  Press coverage was extensive.  Bush trumped Mejia\'s 
commercial contacts in Madrid on the top front page of the 
government-owned \"Listin Diario\" of Sept 17: \"Jeb Bush, 
Viyella and Corripio Emphasize Dominican Investment Climate\" 
(head of the Dominican Council of Private Enterprise and 
Elena Viyella and noted businessman Jose Luis Corripio were 
speaking in Spain).  \"El Pais\" carried an interior piece with 
a photo of the Governor toasting Vice President Ortiz Bosch: 
\"Governor Jeb Bush Comes to Improve Economic Relations.\" A 
full-page spread of photos from the Ambassador\'s reception 
appeared on the front of the social section in \"Hoy\" entitled 
\"Governor Jeb Bush Emphasizes the Work of Dominicans in 
Florida.\" 
 
9.  Comment.  The trip was an energetic and well-publicized 
success, with more than 800 meetings (arranged by the US 
Foreign Commercial Service) for the visiting trade 
delegation.  Governor Bush received warm and enthusiastic 
support for Miami\'s bid as the permanent secretariat for the 
FTAA and in return offered his support for an FTA between the 
United States and the Dominican Republic.  Bush\'s favorable 
views about the importance of US-Dominican and 
Florida-Dominican relations undoubtably boosted the US image 
in the eyes of the Dominican public.  End Comment. 
HERTELL 
"
"10944","9/23/2003 23:32","03SANTODOMINGO5157","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 005157 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EPET, PREL, DR, VE 
SUBJECT: DOMINICANS PUZZLED BY CHAVEZ\'S ACCUSATIONS AND 
\"CUTOFF\" IN OIL EXPORTS 
 
1. (U) Summary.  Relations between Venezuela and the 
Dominican Republic have been strained since July 27, when 
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez accused ex-Venezuelan 
President Carlos Andres Perez of conspiring to assassinate 
him and criticized the Dominican government for allowing this 
to take place within its borders.  The relationship hit a new 
low September 19, when Venezuela officially announced that it 
would no longer deliver oil to the island country.  The 
economic impact on the Dominican Republic will be minimal, 
with the country turning to the world market.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) On July 27, Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez, while 
speaking on his domestic show &Alo, presidente,8 accused 
ex-Venezuelan President Carlos Andres Perez (CAP) of leading 
a conspiracy from the Dominican Republic to assassinate him. 
(Chavez\' failed coup in 1992 was directed against Perez.) 
Chavez accused the GODR of tolerating this \"centro de 
conspiracion8 to operate and called on Dominican President 
Hipolito Mejia to take drastic action against Perez. 
Although at first the focus of these allegations was on Perez 
himself and not on the GODR, Chavez\'s assertions of knowledge 
of these activities and accusations of \"irresponsibility8 
strained relations between the two countries and the 
presidents.  Mejia responded quickly by classifying Chavez\'s 
remarks as a &syndrome Chavez has towards Carlos Perez\" and 
denying GODR involvement.  Presidential spokesman Luis 
Gonzalez Fabra followed by announcing that Dominican security 
agencies kept close watch over suspicious foreigners living 
legally in the Dominican Republic, including the anti-Chavez 
Venezuelans, and that there was nothing for the GOV to worry 
about. 
 
3. (U) The opposition Dominican Liberation Party (PLD) of 
former president Leonel Fernandez complained to the press 
about the Mejia government\'s \"failure to investigate\" the 
case.  Chavez in his remarks asserted that \"proof\" had been 
given to the GODR but Mejia commented that nothing 
substantial had been provided. 
 
4. (U) Tension between the two countries escalated further 
after Venezuelan Foreign Minister Roy Chaderton remarked at 
the end of an Andean Nation Community/MERCOSUR meeting in 
August that the accusations presented by President Chavez 
(and the Dominican response) had indeed affected relations 
between the two nations.  Following those statements, Chavez 
further alleged that Dominican officials as well as people of 
&great power8 from the Dominican Republic were involved 
with CAP in the plot to assassinate him. 
 
5. (U) Venezuela\'s Energy & Mines Minister Rafael Ramirez 
supported his president\'s statements during a press 
conference on Friday, September 19, where he specifically 
accused private traders and companies involved in the 
shipment of oil to the Dominican Republic as being part of 
the conspiracy.  He declined to identify the oil traders by 
name.  During that same press conference Ramirez announced 
the end of Venezuelan oil shipments to the Dominican Republic 
&in defense of our country\'s democracy and sovereignty.8 
 
6. (SBU) The Dominican Republic was purchasing about 53,000 
barrels of oil per day through the San Jose Pact Energy 
Agreement that allows it and other Central American and 
Caribbean countries to purchase oil from Venezuela and 
Mexico.  The formal end of shipments from Venezuela has 
confirmed that the GODR must purchase on the world market 
(GODR officials told the press that in fact the erratic 
nature of Venezuelan supply has been a reality \"for months, 
making us buy elsewhere.\")  Under the terms of the San Jose 
pact, Venezuela and Mexico supply oil to 24 beneficiary 
countries and may convert up to 20 percent of the cost into 
long-term development loans at concessionary interest rates. 
(The GODR\'s former ambassador to Caracas dismisses this as \"a 
dead letter,\" asserting that no country except perhaps Cuba 
secures any benefits through these clauses.) 
 
7. (SBU) Perhaps in an effort to help Mejia and to take the 
pressure off the GODR, ex-President Perez took calls from 
Dominican journalists and confirmed that he had been living 
in his New York apartment for the last three months and said 
that he was not involved in any conspiracy to assassinate 
Chavez or overthrow his government. 
 
8. (U) Last week\'s news from Caracas was that Chavez did not 
intend to return his Ambassador to Santo Domingo \"until a new 
government is in place.\"  Questioned by the press, GODR Vice 
President Milagros Ortiz Bosch, acting head of government 
while Mejia is on a state visit to Spain, said that 
differences should be handled by diplomatic means.  The GODR 
Foreign Ministry confirmed that the Dominican ambassador will 
remain in Caracas. 
 
9. (SBU) Comment.  Although relations between the Dominican 
Republic and Venezuela may be strained for the moment, they 
provide more fuel for press speculation than cause for 
concern.  The suspension of oil shipments will have little 
effect on the Dominican economy.  The government has assured 
the people that the country has dependable access to oil from 
other sources.  Chavez is chasing demons for domestic 
political advantage; while those demons exist, few them are 
resident in the Dominican Republic.  End Comment. 
HERTELL 
"
"11088","9/30/2003 15:15","03SANTODOMINGO5275","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","03SANTODOMINGO4760|03STATE254587|03STATE272470","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 005275 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NP AND T 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/30/2113 
TAGS: KNNP, MNUC, PARM, PREL, PHSA, PBTS, EAIR, EWWT, DR 
SUBJECT: STILL WAITING FOR GODR SUBSTANTIVE REACTION TO PSI 
STATEMENT 
 
REF: A. A. STATE 272470 
     B. B. SANTO DOMINGO 4760 
     C. C. STATE 254587 
 
Classified By: EcoPol Counselor Michael Meigs for reasons 1.5(B) and (D 
). 
 
 1.  (C)  Per ref A, we again contacted GODR Deputy Director 
for the Americas, Roger Espaillat, to inquire if the GODR has 
any substantive comment on the Statement of Interdiction 
Principles adopted by the Proliferation Security Initiative 
participants.  Espaillat replied that the GODR generally 
supports measures to curb proliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction and is a good friend of the USG, but declined 
further substantive comment.  He promised a more thorough 
response via diplomatic note in the near future (to be 
reported septel). 
KUBISKE 
"
"11129","10/1/2003 15:54","03SANTODOMINGO5330","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03SANTODOMINGO5118","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005330 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR MCISAAC, CA/OCS/ACS/WHA HALDANE, 
OBO/PE/DE/CSB DAI OH & HAO BUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV, SOCI, EAIR, EWWT, CASC, DR 
SUBJECT: EARTHQUAKE AFTERSHOCKS AND DAMAGE ASSESSMENT 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 5118 
 
 1.  Aftershocks from the earthquake that hit the Dominican 
Republic on September 22 (reftel) continue to be felt in the 
northern region of the country.  More than 200 aftershocks 
have been reported, measuring up to 5.1 on the Richter Scale. 
 The original quake and the aftershocks have produced damage 
estimates ranging from RD $500 to 700 million (US $16.7 to 
23.4 million).  Thus far, President Mejia has designated RD 
$100 million (US$3.3 million) for rebuilding in the Puerto 
Plata area, RD $50 million (US$1.6 million) of which will go 
to reconstruction efforts for the GODR Justice Building and 
the regional campus of the Autonomous University of Santo 
Domingo. 
 
2.  Damages were greatest in the northern and central cities 
of Puerto Plata and Santiago.  More than 120 buildings were 
damaged in Puerto Plata, including 44 public schools, 4 
hospitals and 4 government offices.  In Santiago, 103 
building showed structural damage, including 10 government 
offices, 6 public schools and 1 hospital.  Media reports 
indicate that anywhere from 10,000 to 18,000 Dominican 
children are temporarily unable to attend school due to 
damaged buildings or buildings that have not yet been cleared 
for occupancy.  The GODR is considering the use of tents as 
temporary classrooms. 
 
3.  Despite the structural damage and the severity of the 
earthquake, injuries were minimal with fewer than 50 people 
seeking treatment.  The GODR is attributing three deaths to 
the quake, one from fatal injuries received in the collapse 
of a boarding house and two from heart attacks.  There were 
no Amcit injuries or deaths as a consequence of the 
earthquake or its aftershocks. 
KUBISKE 
"
"11158","10/2/2003 20:36","03SANTODOMINGO5390","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 005390 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS AID 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/29/2013 
TAGS: DR, EAID, PGOV, PINR, PREL 
SUBJECT: VICE PRESIDENT FAULTS PRESIDENT MEJIA, ADDRESSES 
CAMPAIGN ISSUES 
 
 
Classified By: Charge Lisa Kubiske for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  Dominican Vice President and candidate for 
president Milagros Ortiz-Bosch told DCM Kubiske September 26 
that President Mejia cannot win re-election next May because 
of his unpopularity and voter opposition to a second 
consecutive term.  She agreed with Mejia\'s vision and 
policies, but faulted him, in her view, for lack of strategy, 
failure to communicate his administration\'s considerable 
accomplishments, and poor economic management.  She portrayed 
herself as clean (uncorrupted) and statesmanlike, in contrast 
to other candidates in the field such as Leonel Fernandez of 
the PLD.  With respect to electricity, Ortiz-Bosch said the 
GODR would seek assistance from expert consultants on how to 
conduct a tender to attract strong bidders, including from 
the United States, to invest in two distribution companies 
recently returned to government hands.  End summary.  End 
summary. 
 
Unpopularity of President Mejia 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
2. (C) GODR Vice President and presidential candidate 
Milagros Ortiz-Bosch (PRD), at a luncheon hosted on September 
26 by DCM Kubiske with several of Ortiz-Bosch\'s political 
advisers and emboffs, asserted that President Mejia could not 
win his controversial bid for reelection in May 2004. 
According to Ortiz-Bosch, Mejia -- beset by the Dominican 
Republic\'s pressing economic problems and accusations of 
mismanagement and corruption -- lacks the necessary public 
support.  Moreover, voters and especially the PRD rank and 
file reject presidential reelection, regardless of candidate, 
even though the PRD-dominated Congress amended the 
constitution last year to allow this.  She said that a poll 
commissioned by the PRD and conducted by a US firm in 
mid-September found that 79 percent of voters reject Mejia\'s 
reelection, while only 18 percent support it.  Also, 55 
percent expressed disapproval of presidential reelection in 
principle.  The PRD has commissioned a second poll on these 
issues. 
 
Quest for PRD Nomination 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
3. (C) The Vice President stressed the importance of holding 
the already announced \"plebiscite\" of PRD members October 12, 
organized at the behest of the seven would-be candidates 
challenging President Mejia for the party\'s nomination, so as 
to test rank-and-file sentiment on the reelection issue.  She 
said the plebiscite would be in the tradition of the PRD as 
\"the most democratic political party in Latin America.\"  The 
results of the plebiscite and the polls would then be aired 
at a proposed PRD nominating convention November 2.  Asked 
how the fractious party could win the election, Ortiz-Bosch 
expressed confidence that unity would be achieved through 
internal negotiations, and she dismissed President Mejia\'s 
call for arbitration by the Central Electoral Board (JCE). 
She predicted that if the PRD unifies behind a single 
alternative candidate, its poll numbers will immediately gain 
8-10 percent over Mejia\'s low approval ratings. 
 
Mejia\'s Shortcomings 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
4. (C) Ortiz-Bosch faulted President Mejia for poor economic 
management, lack of strategy, and failure to communicate with 
the public on the administration\'s considerable 
accomplishments in agriculture and rural development, labor, 
tourism, education, environment, water and sanitation, and 
housing.  She said she agrees with Mejia\'s political vision 
and his policies, but believes he has not followed through on 
campaign promises and has not allocated enough resources to 
human development programs.  She claimed the local press has 
felt \"intimidated\" for the past several months and has 
practiced self-censorship, including restricting publication 
of unspecified opinion poll data.  Acknowledging the impact 
of external events (9/11, a sluggish world economy, oil price 
increases), the Vice President nonetheless accused Mejia of 
failing to manage what he could control locally, such as the 
massive BANINTER bank fraud and problems in the energy sector. 
 
5. (C) Ortiz-Bosch emphasized the need for a long-term 
government strategy, carried out through a multi-year budget 
with annual performance targets.  It would give priority to 
investments in human capital through education, health, and 
social services.  The government should do more to promote 
citizen participation in the political process, with an 
effective communication program that would go beyond 
President Mejia\'s near-monopoly of statements to the media. 
Official pressures for media self-censorship should cease, 
she said.  The Vice President commented that Dominican 
society over the years has become better informed, more 
pro-democracy, and less tolerant of behind-the-scenes 
manipulation. 
 
Main Adversary - Leonel Fernandez 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
6. (C) Asked how the PRD would attack its main adversary in 
the coming elections, former president (1996-2000) Leonel 
Fernandez of the Dominican Liberation Party (PLD), the Vice 
President said she would take him to task for having 
concentrated 80 percent of government expenditures in the 
capital city of Santo Domingo and the second city of Santiago 
and having provided only 20 percent to the rest of the 
country.  She noted that the Mejia administration had 
reversed that ratio and restored a more balanced allocation. 
One of Ortiz-Bosch\'s advisers said that if she were to become 
the PRD candidate, she could accuse Fernandez of being 
corrupt, but he could not credibly make any such allegations 
against her. 
 
Progress on USAID Projects 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
7. (C) The Vice President, who is also State Secretary of 
Education, commented that a civil service reform for public 
school teachers, including unified benefits and higher 
salaries, was nearly complete.  She expressed appreciation 
for USAID collaboration in publicizing essential information 
of the Secretariat of Education on a world-wide web page, 
enhancing transparency. 
 
8. (C) Ortiz-Bosch, as chairperson of a committee to 
implement the new Dominican criminal procedures code, said 
that she had requested a budget for implementation beginning 
in 2004 and had asked the Justice Secretariat to help her 
convene regular working sessions of the committee.  She also 
reaffirmed her commitment to justice reform, dating from her 
years as a senator when she had worked on a reform bill. 
Priorities in her view include more training for judges and 
courtroom prosecutors (\"fiscales\"), inter alia to reduce 
their susceptibility to corruption, and a big increase in 
number of public defenders. 
 
9. (C) Anticipating the GODR\'s renationalization of two 
electricity distribution companies on October 1, Ortiz-Bosch 
raised the urgency of announcing a new tender of the 
companies\' shares for private purchase.  She said the GODR 
would seek assistance from expert consultants on how to 
conduct the tender so as to attract the best possible 
bidders, from the United States and other countries. 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
10. (C) The Vice President is walking a tightrope, being both 
a senior member of President Mejia\'s administration and one 
of his most credible challengers for the PRD nomination for 
the presidency.  She appears nonetheless committed to the PRD 
plebiscite and November 2 national convention, which Mejia 
has rejected in favor of a national convention (without 
plebiscite) on November 23. 
 
11. (C) Mejia\'s rivals in the PRD fear that his expected use 
-- or misuse -- of government resources to promote his 
candidacy and his control of the upper levels of the party 
will enable him to have his way, dooming the PRD to defeat in 
the election.  This is a plausible, though not inevitable, 
scenario.  Were his PRD challengers to unite behind a single 
candidate, they might be able to thwart his bid for the 
nomination.  But they have not yet shown the will to do so. 
In any case, it is premature to predict what will happen in 
the election next May.  Mejia has announced that according to 
a poll conducted o/a September 20, the PRD had pulled ahead 
of the PLD in voter preferences by a 5-percentage-point 
margin. 
 
12. (C) With regard to the Vice President\'s desire to 
contract expert consultants on energy sector privatization, 
Embassy is exploring possibilities with the World Bank, IDB, 
and AID. 
 
Bio Note 
- - - - - 
 
13. (U) The first Dominican woman to assume presidential 
duties, Ortiz-Bosch has acted as president for 135 days 
during Mejia\'s 38 trips abroad and, along with Minister of 
Tourism Rafael \"Fello\" Subervi, is widely recognized as one 
of the most potent alternatives for the PRD nomination. 
KUBISKE 
"
"11159","10/2/2003 21:42","03SANTODOMINGO5391","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 005391 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/ESC/IEC AND 
EB/IFD/OMA; DEPT PASS DOE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, ECON, EFIN, ENRG, PGOV 
SUBJECT: BLACKOUTS DARKEN DOMINICAN PROSPECTS 
 
 
1. (SBU) IN THE FACE OF ELECTRICITY BLACKOUTS AND GROWING 
PUBLIC DISSATISFACTION, ON OCTOBER 1 THE GODR TOOK CONTROL OF 
TWO OF THE COUNTRY\'S THREE ELECTRICITY DISTRIBUTION 
COMPANIES.  THE DEAL SIGNED SEPTEMBER 10 CALLS FOR THE GODR 
TO REPURCHASE SPANISH FIRM UNION FENOSA\'S FIFTY PERCENT SHARE 
OF EDENORTE AND EDESUR (\"THE EDES\") FOR AN INITIAL PAYMENT OF 
ROUGHLY $15 MILLION, FOLLOWED BY PAYMENT OF ABOUT $360 
MILLION FINANCED OVER TWELVE YEARS.  THIS COULD BRING TO A 
CLOSE A TENSE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE GODR AND UNION FENOSA 
THAT REACHED A PEAK IN AUGUST. THE DEAL RAISES QUESTIONS 
ABOUT THE GODR\'S ABILITY TO RESTORE FINANCIAL VIABILITY TO 
THE SECTOR OR TO MANAGE THE ACCRUING DEBT, ISSUES THAT COULD 
DELAY THE SECOND DISBURSEMENT OF THE GODR\'S NEW STANDBY 
AGREEMENT WITH THE IMF AND COULD DELAY APPROVAL OF A WORLD 
BANK ENERGY SECTOR LOAN.  END SUMMARY. 
 
---------- 
BACKGROUND 
---------- 
 
2.  (U)  THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC HAS A LONG HISTORY OF ENERGY 
SECTOR-RELATED PROBLEMS, DATING BACK TO THE TRUJILLO ERA.  TO 
ADDRESS POWER SHORTAGES IN THE 1990S, THE BALAGUER GOVERNMENT 
INVITED INDEPENDENT POWER PRODUCERS (IPPS) TO INVEST IN THE 
COUNTRY, SELLING THEIR POWER UNDER LONG-TERM CONTRACTS TO THE 
STATE-OWNED UTILITY (CDE), WHICH ALSO HAD GENERATION 
FACILITIES. 
 
3. (SBU) DURING THE 1990S, THE FERNANDEZ ADMINISTRATION 
LAUNCHED A PRIVATIZATION EFFORT, SELLING 50 PERCENT OF THE 
GENERATING COMPANIES (EXCEPT FOR HYDRO) AND 50 PERCENT OF THE 
DISTRIBUTION COMPANIES TO FOREIGN INVESTORS, SPANISH UNION 
FENOSA AND VIRGINIA-BASED AES.  THE INVESTORS ACQUIRED 
MANAGEMENT CONTROL OF THE DISTRIBUTION COMPANIES WITH THEIR 
SHARES.  UNION FENOSA REPORTEDLY ONLY RELUCTANTLY AGREED TO 
PARTNER WITH THE GODR IN EDENORTE IN RETURN FOR GETTING THE 
POTENTIALLY MORE PROFITABLE CONCESSION OF EDESUR.  IN THE 
PRIVATIZATION, THE STATE-OWNED CDE (RE-NAMED CDEEE) 
MAINTAINED CONTROL OF TRANSMISSION AND ITS CONTRACTUAL 
COMMITMENTS TO THE INDEPENDENT PRODUCERS.  THROUGHOUT THIS 
PERIOD, THE GODR MAINTAINED A GENERAL ELECTRICITY SUBSIDY. 
IN THE FACE OF MILLIONS OF DOLLARS IN ARREARS THAT THE GODR 
OWED THE IPPS, LAST YEAR THE GODR DETERMINED THAT IT COULD NO 
LONGER AFFORD THE GENERAL SUBSIDY THAT HAD GROWN TO SEVERAL 
MILLION USD PER MONTH. 
 
4.  (U) IN SEPTEMBER 2002, PRESIDENT MEJIA ANNOUNCED THAT THE 
GODR HAD REACHED AGREEMENT WITH THE IPPS (EXCEPT FOR NORTH 
CAROLINA-BASED COGENTRIX) TO RENEGOTIATE THEIR CONTRACTS AND 
SELL POWER DIRECTLY TO THE DISTRIBUTORS IN THE SAME MANNER AS 
THE PARTIALLY-GOVERNMENT-OWNED GENERATING COMPANIES.  IN 
TURN, THE GODR WOULD COMPENSATE THE IPPS FOR GIVING UP THEIR 
CONTRACTS WITH CDE THROUGH NEGOTIATED PAYMENT OF \"STRANDED 
COSTS,\" INTENDED TO COVER THE LOSS OF GUARANTEED PAYMENT FOR 
THE ORIGINAL CONTRACT TERMS.  MEJIA ALSO ANNOUNCED PLANS TO 
ELIMINATE THE GENERAL SUBSIDY THAT HAD GROWN TO THE 
EQUIVALENT OF ABOUT US $15 MILLION PER MONTH (AT THE CURRENT 
RATE OF 19 PESOS TO THE DOLLAR; IT IS NOW 33 TO THE DOLLAR). 
MEJIA WANTED TO USE INSTEAD A TARGETED SUBSIDY FOR POOR 
NEIGHBORHOODS.  THE GODR PLANNED FOR AN ANTI-FRAUD UNIT TO 
ENFORCE COLLECTIONS. GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS WERE TO BE 
REQUIRED TO PAY FOR ENERGY CONSUMPTION, AND THE ELECTRICITY 
TARIFFS WERE TO BE ADJUSTED MONTHLY UNDER AN AGREED FORMULA. 
AS PART OF THE AGREEMENT, THE TARIFF THAT GENERATORS CHARGED 
THE DISTRIBUTORS WAS PEGGED TO THE DOLLAR EXCHANGE RATE, AND 
THE DISTRIBUTION COMPANIES BILLED CUSTOMERS AT AN EXCHANGE 
RATE TWO MONTHS OLD. 
 
5.  (U) SINCE THEN, THE GODR HAS FINALIZED CONTRACTS WITH 
ONLY SOME OF THE IPPS.  MOREOVER, THE GOVERNMENT CONTINUES TO 
SUBSIDIZE ALL CONSUMERS FOR THE FIRST 300 MW OF MONTHLY 
ELECTRICITY USAGE, THEREBY ABSORBING SOME OF THE TARIFF 
INCREASES RESULTING FROM FUEL PRICE HIKES AND/OR EXCHANGE 
RATE DEPRECIATION. THE GOVERNMENT ESTABLISHED A 
\"STABILIZATION FUND\" FOR THAT PURPOSE, BUT EFFORTS TO RAISE 
REVENUE FOR THE FUND -- SUCH AS THE RECENTLY IMPOSED 
FIVE-PERCENT TAX ON EXPORTS -- HAVE NOT BEEN AS SUCCESSFUL AS 
HOPED. 
 
---------- 
THE CRISIS 
---------- 
 
6.  (SBU) IN JULY OF THIS YEAR, THE SECTOR COULD NO LONGER 
SUSTAIN THE RISING FUEL COSTS, CONSUMER NON-PAYMENT, AND THE 
RAPIDLY DEPRECIATING PESO.  ALL THREE DISTRIBUTION COMPANIES 
FACED SOLVENCY PROBLEMS AND HAD ACCUMULATED ARREARS IN 
PAYMENTS TO GENERATING COMPANIES.  EDENORTE AND EDESUR\'S 
DEBTS TO GENERATING COMPANIES HAD REPORTEDLY REACHED OVER 
$100 MILLION, AND THEIR ACCUMULATED LOSSES WERE MORE THAN 
TWICE THAT AMOUNT.  PROBLEMS WITH EDENORTE WERE PARTICULARLY 
ACUTE, AND AS BLACKOUTS SPARKED PROTESTS IN THE NORTHERN PART 
OF THE COUNTRY, THE GOVERNMENT THREATENED TO INTERVENE. 
UNION FENOSA INDICATED THAT IT WOULD BE WILLING FOR THE GODR 
TO TAKE OVER EDENORTE, BUT DID NOT WANT TO GIVE UP EDESUR, 
WHICH COMPANY REPRESENTATIVES SAID WAS STILL PROFITABLE.  THE 
GODR, ON THE OTHER HAND, DID NOT WANT TO SEPARATE THE TWO. 
MOREOVER, THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB), HELD A 
REPORTED $180 MILLION-PLUS IN OUTSTANDING LOANS TO THE TWO 
DISTRIBUTION COMPANIES AND HAD CONTRACTUAL RIGHTS ON 
DETERMINING HOW TO ADDRESS THE INSOLVENCY.  THE 
SUPERINTENDENT OF ELECTRICITY SENT THE IDB A LETTER IN AUGUST 
ASKING THE BANK TO INTERVENE. THE IDB LOANS WERE GUARANTEED 
BY THE SPANISH PARENT OF UNION FENOSA.  WHEN THE IDB CHOSE 
NOT TO INTERVENE, MEJIA NEGOTIATED A DEAL DIRECTLY WITH UNION 
FENOSA TO REPURCHASE THE COMPANIES. THE GODR ANNOUNCED THE 
AGREEMENT ON SEPTEMBER 9, ONLY TWO DAYS BEFORE MEJIA LEFT ON 
A STATE VISIT TO SPAIN. 
 
-------- 
THE DEAL 
-------- 
 
7.  (SBU) ALTHOUGH THE DEAL REPORTEDLY INVOLVES 14 SEPARATE 
CONTRACTS, THE BASIC TERMS OF THE REPURCHASE HAVE BEEN WIDELY 
PUBLICIZED, AND THE GODR MADE THE INITIAL \"BUY-SELL\" CONTRACT 
AVAILABLE ON-LINE 
(HTTP://CDE.GOV.DO/CONT(UNDERLINE)COMPRA(UNDE RLINE)EDES.HTM). 
 ACCORDING TO THAT PORTION OF THE CONTRACT THE GODR AGREED TO 
PAY $15 MILLION AT CLOSING AND PAYMENTS TOTALING $680 MILLION 
OVER THE NEXT 144 MONTHS. THE PAYMENT SCHEDULE INCLUDES 
INTEREST AND UNSPECIFIED CREDITS. THE ESTIMATED $362 MILLION 
NET PRESENT VALUE OF THE AGREEMENT IS SAID TO BE NEARLY TWICE 
THE AMOUNT OF UNION FENOSA\'S INITIAL INVESTMENT.  FURTHER 
DETAILS ARE NOT AVAILABLE. THE AGREEMENT APPARENTLY DOES NOT 
ADDRESS ARREARS OWED TO THE GENERATORS, WHICH EXCEED $100 
MILLION.  GODR OFFICIALS CLAIM THAT THE GOVERNMENT DOES NOT 
INCUR ADDITIONAL DEBT, SINCE THE GODR WAS RESPONSIBLE FOR 
HALF OF THE EDE\'S LIABILITIES ANYWAY, AND THE COMPANIES WERE 
ALREADY ACCUMULATING LOSSES EACH MONTH. 
 
--------- 
REACTION 
--------- 
 
8.  (SBU)  AS PROVIDERS SHUT DOWN THEIR OPERATIONS BECAUSE OF 
ARREARS DUE FROM THE EDES, POWER SHORTAGES BEGAN DURING THE 
MONTH OF AUGUST, WITH ROLLING BLACKOUTS ACROSS THE COUNTRY. 
BLACKOUTS HAVE BECOME MORE FREQUENT AND PROLONGED OVER THE 
PAST FEW DAYS, LEADING TO SCATTERED DEMONSTRATIONS, 
DISRUPTING TRAFFIC AND BUSINESSES (SEPTEL).  SANTO DOMINGO, 
PREVIOUSLY LESS AFFECTED, HAS BEGUN TO EXPERIENCE THE 
EFFECTS, ESPECIALLY IN THE PERIPHERAL NEIGHBORHOODS.  WITH 
TRAFFIC LIGHTS OUT OF COMMISSION, TRAFFIC IN THE CAPITAL HAS 
BECOME EVEN MORE SNARLED THAN USUAL.  ACCORDING TO 
REPRESENTATIVE OF U.S.-OWNED COMPANY ADS, WHOSE COMPANY HAS 
FIFTY-PERCENT OWNERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT CONTROL OF THE THIRD 
DISTRIBUTION COMPANY (EDE-ESTE), WORK CREWS HAVE HAD TO LEAVE 
NEIGHBORHOODS IN THE EAST OF THE COUNTRY AFTER CROWDS THREW 
ROCKS AT THEM. THE POLITICAL OPPOSITION IS PROBABLY 
ENCOURAGING THIS BEHAVIOR. 
 
9.  (SBU) MOST LOCAL CONTACTS ARE CRITICAL OF THE 
GOVERNMENT\'S DECISION TO REPURCHASE THE TWO DISTRIBUTION 
COMPANIES, BUT NO ONE HAS EXPRESSED REGRET ABOUT THE 
DEPARTURE OF UNION FENOSA.  DOMINICANS BLAME THE SPANISH FIRM 
FOR MANY ELECTRICAL SECTOR PROBLEMS AND FAULT THE GOVERNMENT 
FOR MISMANAGING THE PRIVATIZATION.  THE PRESS AND PRESIDENT 
MEJIA HIMSELF HAVE PUBLICLY STATED THAT UNION FENOSA\'S 
INITIAL PURCHASE OF THE EDES WAS FACILITATED WITH PAY-OFFS. 
SOME INSIST THAT THE SPANISH FIRM SUBSEQUENTLY SKIMMED MONEY 
FROM THE COMPANIES, AT THE EXPENSE OF ITS GOVERNMENT PARTNER. 
 IN A PRIVATE MEETING WITH EMBOFF, A FORMER SUPERINTENDENT OF 
ELECTRICITY LISTED WAYS THAT UNION FENOSA \"CHEATED\" THE 
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC BY TRANSFERRING PROCEEDS TO UNION FENOSA 
SPAIN.  HE DESCRIBED INSIDER LOANS TO THE EDES FROM THE 
PARENT COMPANY AT TWICE THE MARKET INTEREST RATE; INFLATED 
SERVICES CONTRACTS WITH SPANISH COMPANIES RELATED TO UNION 
FENOSA EXECUTIVES; SOFTWARE THAT UNION FENOSA SOLD THE EDES 
FOR $20 MILLION BUT HAD PROVIDED TO ARGENTINA FOR JUST $1 
MILLION; AND IRREGULAR ACCOUNTING PRACTICES.  IN THAT 
OFFICIAL\'S VIEW, WHICH SEEMS TO REFLECT PUBLIC SENTIMENT, THE 
GODR SHOULD HAVE OBLIGED UNION FENOSA TO LEAVE ON TERMS MUCH 
MORE ADVANTAGEOUS TO THE GODR -- IN RETURN FOR NOT PURSUING 
CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS AGAINST THE COMPANY. 
 
10.  (SBU) THE PRESS REPORTS THAT TWO GENERATING COMPANIES 
HAVE FILED SUIT AGAINST THE SPANISH EDES AND CDEEE TO DECLARE 
THE AGREEMENT AS PREJUDICING THEIR OWN CLAIMS FOR PAYMENT AND 
SEEKING TO BLOCK THE TRANSFER OF SHARES TO CDEEE.   AN 
EXECUTIVE WITH INDEPENDENT POWER PRODUCER COGENTRIX TOLD 
ECONOFF THAT HE BELIEVES THE AGREEMENT VIOLATES HIS COMPANY\'S 
CONTRACT AND THE COUNTRY\'S ELECTRICITY LAW.  U.S.-OWNED AES 
HAS PARTIAL OWNERSHIP OF EDE-ESTE, INVESTMENTS IN GENERATING 
FACILITIES AND A LIQUEFIED NATURAL GAS TERMINAL IN THE 
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC; AN AES OFFICIAL TOLD EMBOFFS THEY OPPOSED 
THE GOVERNMENT\'S DECISION.  AES COMMENTED THAT THEY WOULD 
HAVE PREFERRED A PRIVATE SECTOR SOLUTION, PERHAPS A BROKERED 
AGREEMENT FACILITATED BY AN INDEPENDENT CONSULTANT.  NEITHER 
THE DISTRIBUTOR NOR THE GENERATING COMPANIES EXPECT PAYMENT 
CONDITIONS WILL IMPROVE UNDER GODR MANAGEMENT. 
 
------------ 
IFI CONCERN 
------------ 
 
11.  (SBU) THE EFFECT OF THE UNION FENOSA DEAL ON THE FISCAL 
SITUATION IS SO UNCLEAR THAT AN IMF TEAM WHICH ARRIVED THIS 
WEEK DEPARTED AFTER A SINGLE DAY, REPORTEDLY UNABLE TO SECURE 
SUFFICIENT DATA EVEN TO BEGIN AN ANALYSIS. SINCE THE IMF MAY 
TAKE SOME TIME TO DETERMINE THE EFFECTS ON GODR PERFORMANCE 
UNDER TERMS FOR THE STANDBY, IT MAY WELL DELAY THE SECOND 
DISBURSEMENT OF US $61.7 MILLION DUE OCTOBER 15. THE WORLD 
BANK HASDELAYED APPROVAL OF AN ENERGY SECTOR LOAN MEANT TO 
HELP RESOLVE THE ISSUE OF GODR ARREARS TO THE SECTOR.  THE 
IDB HAS ASKED THE AMBASSADOR TO EXPLORE WHAT HELP THE UNITED 
STATES MIGHT PROVIDE TO THE GODR. (NOTE: USAID HAS A TEAM OF 
ELECTRICITY SECTOR SPECIALISTS IN SANTO DOMINGO NOW, 
BEGINNING A FOLLOW-UP TO LAST YEAR\'S USAID-SPONSORED ANALYSIS 
OF THE SECTOR; THEY EXPECT TO HAVE IN HAND BY NEXT WEEK SOME 
OF THE DATA NEEDED BY ALL CONCERNED.) 
 
------------------------------ 
REPRIVATIZATION IN THE OFFING? 
------------------------------ 
 
12.  (SBU) FEW BELIEVE THAT THE GODR\'S DECISION TO REPURCHASE 
UNION FENOSA\'S FIFTY PERCENT OF THE EDES WILL RESOLVE THE 
COUNTRY\'S ENERGY CRISIS.  THE GOVERNMENT HAS SUGGESTED IT MAY 
TRY TO RE-SELL THE TWO DISTRIBUTION COMPANIES TO OTHER 
INVESTORS.  SECRETARY OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE SONIA GUZMAN 
TOLD THE CHARGE SEPTEMBER 30 THAT SHE IS MEETING IN EARLY 
OCTOBER WITH A GROUP OF INVESTORS, INCLUDING A U.S. COMPANY, 
WHO HAVE EXPRESSED INTEREST IN BUYING THE COMPANIES.  SHE 
SAID THAT PRESIDENT MEJIA WANTS TO SELL ALL OF THE SHARES TO 
A NEW PRIVATE SECTOR ENTITY AS SOON AS POSSIBLE.  (NOTE: 
EARLIER, VICE PRESIDENT MILAGROS ORTIZ BOSCH HAD TOLD US THAT 
THE GODR WAS SEEKING ADVICE ON ORGANIZING A PUBLIC TENDER FOR 
THE SAME PURPOSE.) 
 
-------- 
COMMENT 
-------- 
 
13. (SBU) PRESIDENT MEJIA HAS FAILED TO CONVINCE DOMINICANS 
THAT THE APPARENT RE-NATIONALIZATION OF ELEMENTS OF THE 
SECTOR, EVEN IF TEMPORARY, WILL GIVE THEM WHAT THEY WANT: A 
RELIABLE SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY. THE ELECTRICITY ISSUES HAVE 
BECOME A LARGE OBSTACLE TO HIS AMBITION OF WINNING A SECOND 
TERM AND THEY THREATEN TO OVERSHADOW HIS ADMINISTRATION\'S 
MANY ACCOMPLISHMENTS TO DATE. 
 
 
 
 
KUBISKE 
"
"11160","10/2/2003 21:55","03SANTODOMINGO5392","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 005392 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS AID; NSC FOR SHANNON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/29/2013 
TAGS: DR, PGOV, SOCI, ECON, PINS 
SUBJECT: PROTESTS IN DOMINICAN REPUBLIC DRIVEN BY ECONOMIC 
DISCONTENT 
 
 
Classified By: Charge Lisa Kubiske for reasons 1.5 b and d. 
 
1. (C) Scattered demonstrations disrupted some peripheral 
neighborhoods in Santo Domingo and a few interior towns in 
the Dominican Republic September 29-30, temporarily shutting 
down businesses and a major highway and leaving one person 
dead, a dozen including several policemen injured, and dozens 
under arrest.  The disorders were triggered by sudden 
widespread electrical power outages which hit the capital 
September 27, in connection with the renationalization of two 
major electrical distribution companies October 1 (septel). 
The protests were encouraged by groups of community activists 
who have engaged in such activities in the past.  It is also 
likely that elements of opposition political parties, as in 
past outbreaks of unrest, paid the protesters who threw rocks 
at vehicles and blocked roads with burning tires and rubbish. 
 There have also been shooting incidents. 
 
2. (C) Protests had occurred sporadically in recent weeks, 
especially in the north of the country, which was hit earlier 
and harder by the power outages. Underlying the protests is 
rising economic discontent.  Specific irritants commonly 
cited by the GODR\'s critics include: 
 
-- the spread of the power outages, which have revived 
unpleasant memories of severe electric power shortages over 
the years; 
 
-- the declining value of the Dominican peso, which has 
driven consumer inflation toward 35 percent, annualized; and 
 
-- Adverse reaction to the government\'s proposed pay raise 
for public employees of only 9.5 percent. 
 
3. (C) Charge and Defense Attache learned on October 1 during 
a courtesy call on LTG Soto Jimenez that President Mejia had 
just instructed the military to take measures to assure that 
electricity sector facilities such as generating plants were 
watched and protected from protests or destructive strike 
actions. 
 
4.  (C) Comment.  The Mejia administration will want to act 
prudently to contain protests with a minimum of force, 
particularly remembering that the PRD lost three successive 
elections following its heavyhanded repression of riots in 
1984. Opposition parties, thinking they benefit from 
disorder, will be playing the opposite game, encouraging 
resentment.  The eventual risk, over the coming months, will 
be that increasing anger and frustration in the hard-hit 
towns and villages outside the capital will turn destructive. 
 The GODR\'s mishandling of the electricity sector has been 
like shooting itself in the foot, repeatedly.  The challenge 
now, in the face of provocation, is not to shoot the other 
foot. 
 
KUBISKE 
"
"11161","10/2/2003 22:02","03SANTODOMINGO5393","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SANTODOMINGO5088","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 005393 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) AND H 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, ETRD, HA, OREP, PGOV, PINR, PREL, KCOR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN SENATE PRESIDENT SKETCHES AMBITIOUS 
AGENDA 
 
REF: A. REF: (A) SANTO DOMINGO 5088 
 
     B. (B) SANTO DOMINGO 4679 
 
1. (SBU)  Summary:  Dominican Senate President Jesus Vasquez 
Martinez, during a meeting September 8, predicted President 
Mejia would get strong majority support in the ruling PRD for 
his reelection bid in May 2004.  Vasquez said he would work 
with Chamber of Deputies President Alfredo Pacheco on a 
common agenda to expedite needed legislation, including a 
financial control law to prevent future bank scandals, and 
would \"take the Senate to the people\" by inaugurating 
television coverage of Senate proceedings and holding Senate 
meetings in the provinces to hear constituents\' concerns. 
Vasquez emphasized his desire for exchanges with the US 
Senate and visits by US legislators.  The Ambassador urged 
Vasquez to expedite important legislation such as the 
immigration bill and stressed USG interest in a clean 
presidential election next year and removal of parliamentary 
immunity from a legislator who faces charges of alien 
smuggling.  End summary. 
 
Election Prospects 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
2. (SBU) The Ambassador, accompanied by DCM and poloff, 
called on Dominican Senate President Jesus \"Chu\" Vasquez 
Martinez (PRD) September 8 and four Senate committee 
chairpersons (also PRD).  The Ambassador emphasized USG 
interest in the Dominican Republic having fair, free, and 
clean presidential elections next May, open to international 
observers.  Vasquez agreed and said that serious charges of 
fraud, such as last occurred in the 1994 elections, would be 
unlikely, but that the Central Electoral Board needed to do a 
better job of building public confidence in the election 
preparations (as reported Ref A).  The Ambassador asked about 
President Mejia\'s prospects for winning the contested 
nomination of the ruling PRD, in his controversial bid for 
reelection.  Vasquez, who declared himself a Mejia supporter, 
replied that the President was confident of winning a 
majority in the planned party convention.  He said the 
\"solid\" and \"experienced\" PRD organizations outside the 
capital and the tendency of provincial voters to follow the 
guidance of their local legislators, coupled with Mejia\'s 
presidential image, would deliver enough support for him to 
win the May election.  However, he noted the importance of 
achieving party unity behind the candidate and also expressed 
concern about the impact of the nation\'s economic slump on 
the election. 
 
Senate Agenda 
- - - - - - - 
 
3. (SBU) The Ambassador expressed appreciation for swift 
Senate action on legislation of interest to the US in recent 
months, including laws to combat money laundering and 
trafficking in persons, and said he hoped the long-stalled 
immigration bill would soon be approved.  The DCM inquired 
about the Senate\'s agenda priorities.  Vasquez replied that 
they included revisions of the outdated commercial and civil 
codes, the immigration bill, an environment bill, and a 
financial control law that would preclude further bank 
collapses similar to the current BANINTER scandal -- which he 
feared would impose a high political as well as economic cost 
on the country.  He said that he had worked for two years to 
reach a consensus on the immigration bill and that the 
situation of numerous undocumented Haitian immigrants in the 
Dominican Republic was \"worrisome.\"  Without offering 
specifics, he added, \"We need the support of the 
international community and the United States\" to address 
this issue. 
 
4. (SBU)  Vasquez said that the Senate was also interested in 
current free trade negotiations with the US and that he had 
been named to the relevant Senate committee.  However, he 
complained that the Congress \"wasn\'t able to change anything\" 
during the talks.  The Ambassador noted the tight timetable 
for the Dominican Republic to qualify for the proposed 
\"docking\" with the Central American Free Trade Agreement 
(CAFTA) and stressed that few countries had been offered such 
an advantageous arrangement. 
 
Modernization of Senate Procedures 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
5. (SBU) According to Vasquez, the Senate had also designated 
a committee to work out a common agenda with the Chamber of 
Deputies (Ref B), which would then lead to a dialog with the 
executive and judicial branches and civil society.  He also 
said he planned within weeks to inaugurate television 
coverage of Senate proceedings along the lines of C-Span.  In 
the longer term, he hoped to organize legislative excursions 
to each of the provinces, where the senators would hold 
meetings to hear the concerns and wishes of the local public. 
 
Relations with the United States 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
6. (SBU) Vasquez expressed interest in increasing exchanges 
between his institution and the U.S. Senate next year.  He 
hoped that a U.S. senatorial delegation might come to Santo 
Domingo and a delegation of Dominican counterparts might 
visit the Hill.  He also said U.S. speakers on legislative 
topics would be welcome, to share experiences with the 
Dominican Senate.  The Ambassador agreed this would be a good 
idea, and the DCM said we would look for such opportunities 
in connection with visiting Codels.  Vasquez stressed the 
common interests of the Dominican Republic and the United 
States, for example in combatting illegal drugs -- an issue 
on which, he said, \"I am your unconditional ally.\" 
 
Prosecution of Alien Smuggler 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
7. (SBU) The Ambassador asked about prospects that the 
Congress would lift the legislative immunity of accused alien 
smuggler Radhames Ramon Garcia, a member of the Chamber of 
Deputies and former Dominican consul in Haiti (para 6 Ref B), 
and noted the importance the USG attached to enforcement of 
laws against alien smuggling.  Vasquez replied that the issue 
was in the hands of the Attorney General\'s office 
(Procuradoria General de la Republica), but said he (Vasquez) 
had spoken out on this issue.  The DCM suggested Vasquez 
raise it with Chamber of Deputies President Pacheco, and 
Vasquez agreed.  (Note:  Dominican Chief Justice Jorge Subero 
Isa told the press September 22 that the Supreme Court 
expected to try this case in October, but that the Attorney 
General had not yet formally submitted a request to the 
court.  End Note.) 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
8. (SBU) This meeting, like the Ambassador\'s previous call on 
the Chamber of Deputies president (Ref B), set the tone for a 
strong working relationship with this Mission.  Vasquez 
appears to share USG concerns on corruption, migration, 
drugs, and other issues.  He set forth a democratic vision 
and specific plans for realizing it by making the Senate more 
accessible to the people.  However, it is too early to tell 
to what extent the Senate will accomplish its legislative 
priorities; we have already seen press criticism that the new 
congressional leaders are off to a slow start.  Vasquez\'s 
comments on President Mejia\'s election prospects should be 
read in the context of an ongoing struggle within the PRD 
over whether Mejia or one of several rivals will get the 
nomination.  We agree that Mejia is likely to become the 
candidate, but are much less certain of his chances for 
reelection in May, especially if the economy continues to 
deteriorate.  End comment. 
 
Bio Note 
- - - - - 
 
9. (U) Vasquez, born in 1958, has served as senator from 
Maria Trinidad Sanchez province since 1993, was Senate 
president in the late 1990s, and was elected Senate president 
August 16.  He has been PRD president in his native province 
since 1991 and served as provincial governor 1982-85 and 
consul general in Venezuela in 1985-86.  His father, an early 
PRD activist, opposed the Trujillo dictatorship (1930-61). 
KUBISKE 
"
"11293","10/9/2003 1:52","03SANTODOMINGO5562","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","03SANTODOMINGO5391","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 005562 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR/GILROY AND EB FOR A/S WAYNE 
TREASURY FOR OASIA/NANCY LEE; 
NSC FOR TOM SHANNON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/08/2013 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EINV, ENRG, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN PRESIDENT AND TOP ECONOMIC TEAM WORRIED 
ABOUT IFI DELAYS 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 5391 
 
Classified By: CHARGE LISA J. KUBISKE; REASON 1.5 (B AND D). 
 
 1.  (C) SUMMARY: DURING AN OCTOBER 8 MEETING AT THE NATIONAL 
PALACE, PRESIDENT MEJIA TOLD THE AMBASSADOR THAT HE IS 
CONCERNED ABOUT DELAYS IN DISBURSEMENT UNDER THE GODR\'S 
STANDBY AGREEMENT WITH THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND (IMF), 
DELAYS IN DISBURSEMENT OF A $1OO MILLION INTER-AMERICAN 
DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB) SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT LOAN, AND APPROVAL 
OF WORLD BANK ELECTRICITY SECTOR LOANS.  THE ECONOMIC TEAM IS 
WORRIED THAT UNCERTAINTY OVER RELEASE OF IFI FUNDS IS 
EXACERBATING THE COUNTRY\'S FINANCIAL DIFFICULTIES AND SENDING 
THE ECONOMY TOWARD COLLAPSE.  THE PRESIDENT OUTLINED GODR 
ARGUMENTS FOR THE GODR BUYBACK OF ELECTRICITY DISTRIBUTION 
COMPANIES.  HE PROVIDED A COPY OF A LETTER THE GODR HAD SENT 
TO THE IMF OCTOBER 7 AGREEING TO A KEY IMF REQUIREMENT THAT 
AN INDEPENDENT COMMISSION BE CREATED TO REVIEW THE GODR\'S 
RECENT AGREEMENT WITH UNION FENOSA, THE SPANISH COMPANY 
BOUGHT OUT.  IN SUBSEQUENT SEPARATE MEETINGS, THE THREE 
CABINET OFFICIALS MOST DIRECTLY INVOLVED IN THE IMF AGREEMENT 
EACH TOLD CHARGE\' THAT THE GODR WAS ON TRACK WITH (OR AHEAD 
OF) ALL OF THE IMF CONDITIONS FOR RELEASE OF THE SECOND 
TRANCHE OTHER THAN THE CRITERIA RELATED TO ADDITIONAL 
SOVEREIGN DEBT (THAT RESULTED FROM REPURCHASING THE 
ELECTRICITY DISTRIBUTION COMPANIES), AND A REQUIREMENT TO 
IDENTIFY A SOURCE OF REVENUE IT THE GODR CHOOSES TO OFFSET 
ELECTRICITY TARIFF INCREASES.  THEY EACH CONFIRMED THE GODR 
REMAINED FULLY COMMITTED TO THE AGREEMENT AND TO FREE 
TRADE/OPEN ECONOMIC POLICY.  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
------------------------ 
PRESIDENT MEJIA AGITATED 
------------------------ 
 
2.  (C) AMBASSADOR AND EMBOFFS MET WITH PRESIDENT MEJIA 
SHORTLY BEFORE THE AMBASSADOR DEPARTED POST FOR MEETINGS IN 
WASHINGTON.  A VERY AGITATED PRESIDENT SAID THAT HE WAS 
CONCERNED ABOUT THE IMPACT FURTHER DELAYS IN RELEASE OF THE 
SECOND IMF TRANCHE WOULD HAVE ON THE FRAGILE ECONOMIC 
CONDITIONS IN THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC.  HE ACKNOWLEDGED THAT 
THE GOVERNMENT\'S REPURCHASE OF SPANISH INTERESTS IN TWO OF 
THE COUNTRY\'S THREE ELECTRICITY DISTRIBUTION COMPANIES HAD 
PRECIPITATED THE DELAY WHILE THE IMF REVIEWED THE IMPACT ON 
GODR FISCAL COMMITMENTS UNDER THE IMF STANDBY ACCORD SIGNED 
IN AUGUST (REFTEL).  MEJIA SAID THAT THE GODR HAD IMPLEMENTED 
TIGHT FISCAL DISCIPLINE, BUT DID NOT HAVE OTHER OPTIONS FOR 
RESOLVING LONG-STANDING PROBLEMS WITH THE SCANDALOUS SPANISH 
COMPANY UNION FENOSA AND HAD TO REPURCHASE THE SPANISH SHARES 
OR RISK COMPLETE BANKRUPTCY OF THE SECTOR.  MEJIA EXPANDED ON 
EARLIER REPORTS THAT THE COMPANY HAD ENGAGED IN BUSINESS 
PRACTICES THAT \"ROBBED\" THE GOVERNMENT.  HE ALLEGED THAT 
UNION FENOSA HAD EMPLOYED CRIMINALS, INCLUDING U.S. 
DEPORTEES, AND THAT THESE \"BANDITS\" WERE ORGANIZED AND HAD 
DELIBERATELY PROVOKED RECENT ELECTRICITY RIOTS.  HE DESCRIBED 
THE INITIAL PRIVATIZATION OF THE DISTRIBUTION COMPANIES AS A 
COMPLETE FAILURE. 
 
3.  (C) MEJIA EMPHASIZED THE NEED FOR QUICK DISBURSEMENT OF A 
$100 MILLION IDB LOAN FOR SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT THAT HAD BEEN 
PUT ON HOLD PENDING IMF REVIEW OF THE UNION FENOSA DEAL.  THE 
PRESIDENT POINTED OUT THAT THERE WERE 350 PROJECTS -- SUCH AS 
SCHOOLS, WATER SYSTEMS AND HOUSING -- IN POOR AREAS WHOSE 
COMPLETION WAS \"PARALYZED\" DUE TO LACK OF FUNDS.  HE 
PRESENTED A LETTER THAT THE GODR HAD JUST SENT TO THE IMF 
AGREEING TO AN INDEPENDENT COMMISSION TO REVIEW THE 
GOVERNMENT\'S PURCHASE OF UNION FENOSA AND EXPRESSED HOPE THAT 
THE LETTER SHOULD MEET THE CONDITIONS FOR RELEASE OF THE 
SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT LOAN. 
 
4.  (C) THE PRESIDENT ALSO RAILED AGAINST THE DOMINICAN 
BUSINESS SECTOR THAT HAD \"PAID CONGRESS\" TO REJECT THE 
RECENTLY-IMPOSED FIVE-PERCENT EXPORT TAX.  HE SAID THE 
COUNTRY DESPERATELY NEEDED ADDITIONAL REVENUE TO MEET IMF 
FISCAL TARGETS.  HE POINTED OUT THAT THE TAX HAD TARGETED 
SECTORS THAT HAD BENEFITED ROYALLY FROM PESO DEVALUATION AND 
QUESTIONED THE PATRIOTISM OF COMPANIES THAT OPPOSED THE 
MEASURE.  HE SAID THE GODR WOULD BE FORCED TO LOOK FOR OTHER 
MEASURES. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
ECONOMIC CABINET CONFIRMS COMMITMENT TO IFI PROGRAM AND POLICY 
----------------------------------------- 
 
 
5. (C) IN SUBSEQUENT SEPARATE MEETINGS, TECHNICAL SECRETARY 
CARLOS DESPRADEL, FINANCE SECRETARY RAFAEL CALDERON, AND 
CENTRAL BANK GOVERNOR JOSE LOIS MALKUN EACH AFFIRMED TO 
CHARGE AND ECONOFF THAT THE GODR WAS ON TRACK WITH (OR AHEAD 
OF) ALL OF THE IMF CONDITIONS FOR RELEASE OF THE SECOND 
TRANCHE OTHER THAN THE CRITERIA RELATED TO ADDITIONAL 
SOVEREIGN DEBT (THAT RESULTED FROM REPURCHASING THE 
ELECTRICITY DISTRIBUTION COMPANIES), AND A REQUIREMENT TO 
IDENTIFY A SOURCE OF REVENUE IT THE GODR CHOOSES TO OFFSET 
ELECTRICITY TARIFF INCREASES.  THEY SAID THAT THE GODR HAD 
(1) LIBERALIZED THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET, (2) TAKEN STEPS 
TO STRENGTHEN THE BANKING SECTOR, (3) CUT FISCAL EXPENDITURES 
AND (4) CUT CAPITAL EXPENDITURES.  CENTRAL BANK GOVERNOR 
MALKUN ALSO EXPLAINED THAT THE SUPERINTENDENT OF BANKS WAS 
WORKING WITH THE IMF FOR A TEAM TO CONDUCT AN AUDIT OF THE 
BANKING SECTOR, AS REQUIRED IN THE AGREEMENT.  THEY EACH 
INDEPENDENTLY AFFIRMED THAT THE GODR WAS COMMITTED TO THE IMF 
PROGRAM AND TO FREE TRADE/OPEN ECONOMIC POLICY, UNDER WHICH 
THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC HAD PROSPERED IN THE LAST DECADE. 
MALKUN WENT SO FAR AS TO SAY THAT THE GODR WOULD COMPLETE THE 
REQUIREMENTS \"INDEPENDENT OF THE IMF TAKING FURTHER TIME TO 
REVIEW.\" 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
UNION FENOSA: THE MAIN OBSTACLE TO IFI SUPPORT 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
6.  (C)  WITH REGARD TO THE ELECTRICITY SECTOR, THE ECONOMIC 
TEAM WAS IN AGREEMENT THAT THE GODR HAD TO TAKE STEPS TO 
CORRECT THE SITUATION WITH UNION FENOSA.  MALKUN CONFIDED 
THAT HE HAD ADVISED THE PRESIDENT TO WAIT THE THIRTY DAYS THE 
IMF HAD REQUESTED BEFORE SIGNING THE AGREEMENT, BUT EACH DAY 
THE ELECTRICITY SITUATION WAS GETTING WORSE, AND THE 
PRESIDENT HAD APPARENTLY ALREADY MADE COMMITMENTS THAT HE 
FELT HE HAD TO KEEP.  TECHNICAL SECRETARY DESPRADEL TOLD THE 
CHARGE THAT THE PRESIDENT HAD INTELLIGENCE REPORTS ABOUT 
UNION FENOSA EMPLOYEES PROVOKING RIOTS.  DESPRADEL ALSO 
POINTED OUT THAT AT THE SAME TIME THE IMF WAS ASKING FOR 
THIRTY DAYS TO REVIEW THE AGREEMENT, THE IDB WAS DEMANDING 
REPAYMENT OF ITS LOANS.  HE EXPLAINED THAT THE ONLY WAY THAT 
PAYMENT COULD BE MADE WAS THROUGH AN AGREEMENT WITH UNION 
FENOSA.  ALL OF THE ECONOMIC TEAM MEMBERS NOTED THAT THE IMF 
HAD ORIGINALLY NOT CONSIDERED THAT AS A PARTNER WITH UNION 
FENOSA, THE GODR WAS OBLIGATED FOR HALF OF THE DISTRIBUTION 
COMPANIES\' DEBTS ALREADY.  THEY CLAIMED THAT THE GODR DEBT 
OBLIGATION ACTUALLY DECREASED UNDER THE REPURCHASE AGREEMENT, 
SINCE UNION FENOSA RETAINED SOME OBLIGATIONS. 
 
----------------------------- 
SOME SECTORS STILL PROSPERING 
----------------------------- 
 
7.  (C) FINANCE SECRETARY RAFAEL CALDERON REVIEWED THE 
COUNTRY\'S ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE LEADING UP TO THE CRISIS.  HE 
NOTED THAT THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC HAD WORKED HARD TO ATTRACT 
FOREIGN -- ESPECIALLY U.S. -- INVESTMENT, AND THAT THE 
DOMINICAN ECONOMY HAD LED THE REGION IN GROWTH FOR MOST OF 
THE PAST DECADE.  DESPITE THE MASSIVE BANK FRAUD AND 
SUBSEQUENT ECONOMIC CRISIS THAT PRECIPITATED THE IMF ACCORD, 
CALDERON POINTED OUT THAT CERTAIN SECTORS OF THE ECONOMY 
REMAINED STRONG.  HE AND DESPRADEL REPORTED THAT TOURISM, 
FREE TRADE ZONE EXPORTS, TRADITIONAL EXPORTS AND REMITTANCES 
FROM ABROAD WERE AT RECORD LEVELS, AFTER RECOVERING FROM 
DIFFICULT YEARS FROM 2000-2002, (WHICH HAD BEEN DIFFICULT 
PRIMARILY DUE TO THE SLOWDOWN IN THE UNITED STATES\' ECONOMY). 
 
 
-------------- 
THE ROAD AHEAD 
-------------- 
 
8.  (C) ALL OF THE INTERLOCUTORS STRESSED THE NEGATIVE IMPACT 
THAT THE CURRENT UNCERTAINTY WAS HAVING ON MACRO-ECONOMIC 
STABILITY.  CENTRAL BANK GOVERNOR MALKUN SAID THAT 
BUSINESSMEN HAVE BEEN HOUNDING HIM TO MAKE A REASSURING 
STATEMENT TO THE PRESS TO HELP STEM CAPITAL FLIGHT AND A 
FALLING EXCHANGE RATE.  THE ECONOMIC CABINET SAID IT WAS 
READY WITH THE INFORMATION NEEDED FOR THE IMF TALKS NEXT WEEK 
IN SANTO DOMINGO.  WHAT THEY NEED MOST TO AVOID ECONOMIC 
COLLAPSE, THEY SAID, IS THE SPEEDY RESTORATION OF THE 
ANTICIPATED IFI FUNDING.  THE GODR HAD INCLUDED THE IMF, IDB 
AND WORLD BANK DISBURSEMENTS IN ITS PROJECTIONS AND CLAIMS IT 
CAN NOT HOPE TO MEET IMF TARGETS WITHOUT IT. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
9. (C)  WE AGREE THAT FURTHER DELAY IN IFI DISBURSEMENTS WILL 
EXACERBATE A SALVAGEABLE SITUATION.  IN THAT REGARD, THE 
VISIT OF THE IMF TEAM NEXT WEEK IS GOOD NEWS.  ONE MAJOR 
STUMBLING BLOCK HAS BEEN REMOVED WITH GODR CONCURRENCE 
OCTOBER 7 TO CREATE AN INDEPENDENT COMMISSION OF 
INTERNATIONAL EXPERTS TO REVIEW THE ENERGY SECTOR AGREEMENT. 
AT OUR MEETING, WE FOUND PRESIDENT MEJIA CLEARLY FRUSTRATED 
BY THE LACK OF FUNDS THE GODR HAD COUNTED ON TO GET THEM 
THROUGH THE FALL.  HE WAS ACCORDINGLY SKEPTICAL OF THE 
BENEFITS OF THE IMF AGREEMENT AT THAT MEETING.  IN CONTRAST, 
HIS TOP ECONOMIC TEAM -- THE PEOPLE THE IMF WILL WORK WITH 
NEXT WEEK -- WERE CONVINCING IN THEIR COMMITMENT TO FULL 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE ACCORD.  THE IMF WILL WANT TO WORK 
THROUGH THE DEBT IMPLICATIONS OF THE UNION FENIOSA DEAL AND 
GET ASSURANCE ON HOW THE GODR WILL MANAGE THE ELECTRICAL 
SECTOR AND MEET ITS REVENUE COMMITMENTS. 
KUBISKE 
"
"11295","10/9/2003 1:59","03SANTODOMINGO5564","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","03SANTODOMINGO5391","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 005564 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR/GILROY AND EB FOR A/S WAYNE 
TREASURY FOR OASIA/NANCY LEE; 
NSC FOR TOM SHANNON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/08/2013 
TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EINV, ENRG, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN PRESIDENT AND TOP ECONOMIC TEAM WORRIED 
ABOUT IFI DELAYS 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 5391 
 
Classified By: CHARGE LISA J. KUBISKE; REASON 1.5 (B AND D). 
 
 1.  (C) SUMMARY: DURING AN OCTOBER 8 MEETING AT THE NATIONAL 
PALACE, PRESIDENT MEJIA TOLD THE AMBASSADOR THAT HE IS 
CONCERNED ABOUT DELAYS IN DISBURSEMENT UNDER THE GODR\'S 
STANDBY AGREEMENT WITH THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND (IMF), 
DELAYS IN DISBURSEMENT OF A $1OO MILLION INTER-AMERICAN 
DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB) SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT LOAN, AND APPROVAL 
OF WORLD BANK ELECTRICITY SECTOR LOANS.  THE ECONOMIC TEAM IS 
WORRIED THAT UNCERTAINTY OVER RELEASE OF IFI FUNDS IS 
EXACERBATING THE COUNTRY\'S FINANCIAL DIFFICULTIES AND SENDING 
THE ECONOMY TOWARD COLLAPSE.  THE PRESIDENT OUTLINED GODR 
ARGUMENTS FOR THE GODR BUYBACK OF ELECTRICITY DISTRIBUTION 
COMPANIES.  HE PROVIDED A COPY OF A LETTER THE GODR HAD SENT 
TO THE IMF OCTOBER 7 AGREEING TO A KEY IMF REQUIREMENT THAT 
AN INDEPENDENT COMMISSION BE CREATED TO REVIEW THE GODR\'S 
RECENT AGREEMENT WITH UNION FENOSA, THE SPANISH COMPANY 
BOUGHT OUT.  IN SUBSEQUENT SEPARATE MEETINGS, THE THREE 
CABINET OFFICIALS MOST DIRECTLY INVOLVED IN THE IMF AGREEMENT 
EACH TOLD CHARGE\' THAT THE GODR WAS ON TRACK WITH (OR AHEAD 
OF) ALL OF THE IMF CONDITIONS FOR RELEASE OF THE SECOND 
TRANCHE OTHER THAN THE CRITERIA RELATED TO ADDITIONAL 
SOVEREIGN DEBT (THAT RESULTED FROM REPURCHASING THE 
ELECTRICITY DISTRIBUTION COMPANIES), AND A REQUIREMENT TO 
IDENTIFY A SOURCE OF REVENUE IF THE GODR CHOOSES TO OFFSET 
ELECTRICITY TARIFF INCREASES.  THEY EACH CONFIRMED THE GODR 
REMAINED FULLY COMMITTED TO THE AGREEMENT AND TO FREE 
TRADE/OPEN ECONOMIC POLICY.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------ 
PRESIDENT MEJIA AGITATED 
------------------------ 
 
2.  (C) AMBASSADOR AND EMBOFFS MET WITH PRESIDENT MEJIA 
SHORTLY BEFORE THE AMBASSADOR DEPARTED POST FOR MEETINGS IN 
WASHINGTON.  A VERY AGITATED PRESIDENT SAID THAT HE WAS 
CONCERNED ABOUT THE IMPACT FURTHER DELAYS IN RELEASE OF THE 
SECOND IMF TRANCHE WOULD HAVE ON THE FRAGILE ECONOMIC 
CONDITIONS IN THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC.  HE ACKNOWLEDGED THAT 
THE GOVERNMENT\'S REPURCHASE OF SPANISH INTERESTS IN TWO OF 
THE COUNTRY\'S THREE ELECTRICITY DISTRIBUTION COMPANIES HAD 
PRECIPITATED THE DELAY WHILE THE IMF REVIEWED THE IMPACT ON 
GODR FISCAL COMMITMENTS UNDER THE IMF STANDBY ACCORD SIGNED 
IN AUGUST (REFTEL).  MEJIA SAID THAT THE GODR HAD IMPLEMENTED 
TIGHT FISCAL DISCIPLINE, BUT DID NOT HAVE OTHER OPTIONS FOR 
RESOLVING LONG-STANDING PROBLEMS WITH THE SCANDALOUS SPANISH 
COMPANY UNION FENOSA AND HAD TO REPURCHASE THE SPANISH SHARES 
OR RISK COMPLETE BANKRUPTCY OF THE SECTOR.  MEJIA EXPANDED ON 
EARLIER REPORTS THAT THE COMPANY HAD ENGAGED IN BUSINESS 
PRACTICES THAT \"ROBBED\" THE GOVERNMENT.  HE ALLEGED THAT 
UNION FENOSA HAD EMPLOYED CRIMINALS, INCLUDING U.S. 
DEPORTEES, AND THAT THESE \"BANDITS\" WERE ORGANIZED AND HAD 
DELIBERATELY PROVOKED RECENT ELECTRICITY RIOTS.  HE DESCRIBED 
THE INITIAL PRIVATIZATION OF THE DISTRIBUTION COMPANIES AS A 
COMPLETE FAILURE. 
 
3.  (C) MEJIA EMPHASIZED THE NEED FOR QUICK DISBURSEMENT OF A 
$100 MILLION IDB LOAN FOR SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT THAT HAD BEEN 
PUT ON HOLD PENDING IMF REVIEW OF THE UNION FENOSA DEAL.  THE 
PRESIDENT POINTED OUT THAT THERE WERE 350 PROJECTS -- SUCH AS 
SCHOOLS, WATER SYSTEMS AND HOUSING -- IN POOR AREAS WHOSE 
COMPLETION WAS \"PARALYZED\" DUE TO LACK OF FUNDS.  HE 
PRESENTED A LETTER THAT THE GODR HAD JUST SENT TO THE IMF 
AGREEING TO AN INDEPENDENT COMMISSION TO REVIEW THE 
GOVERNMENT\'S PURCHASE OF UNION FENOSA AND EXPRESSED HOPE THAT 
THE LETTER SHOULD MEET THE CONDITIONS FOR RELEASE OF THE 
SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT LOAN. 
 
4.  (C) THE PRESIDENT ALSO RAILED AGAINST THE DOMINICAN 
BUSINESS SECTOR THAT HAD \"PAID CONGRESS\" TO REJECT THE 
RECENTLY-IMPOSED FIVE-PERCENT EXPORT TAX.  HE SAID THE 
COUNTRY DESPERATELY NEEDED ADDITIONAL REVENUE TO MEET IMF 
FISCAL TARGETS.  HE POINTED OUT THAT THE TAX HAD TARGETED 
SECTORS THAT HAD BENEFITED ROYALLY FROM PESO DEVALUATION AND 
QUESTIONED THE PATRIOTISM OF COMPANIES THAT OPPOSED THE 
MEASURE.  HE SAID THE GODR WOULD BE FORCED TO LOOK FOR OTHER 
MEASURES. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
ECONOMIC CABINET CONFIRMS COMMITMENT TO IFI PROGRAM AND POLICY 
----------------------------------------- 
 
 
5. (C) IN SUBSEQUENT SEPARATE MEETINGS, TECHNICAL SECRETARY 
CARLOS DESPRADEL, FINANCE SECRETARY RAFAEL CALDERON, AND 
CENTRAL BANK GOVERNOR JOSE LOIS MALKUN EACH AFFIRMED TO 
CHARGE AND ECONOFF THAT THE GODR WAS ON TRACK WITH (OR AHEAD 
OF) ALL OF THE IMF CONDITIONS FOR RELEASE OF THE SECOND 
TRANCHE OTHER THAN THE CRITERIA RELATED TO ADDITIONAL 
SOVEREIGN DEBT (THAT RESULTED FROM REPURCHASING THE 
ELECTRICITY DISTRIBUTION COMPANIES), AND A REQUIREMENT TO 
IDENTIFY A SOURCE OF REVENUE IF THE GODR CHOOSES TO OFFSET 
ELECTRICITY TARIFF INCREASES.  THEY SAID THAT THE GODR HAD 
(1) LIBERALIZED THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET, (2) TAKEN STEPS 
TO STRENGTHEN THE BANKING SECTOR, (3) CUT FISCAL EXPENDITURES 
AND (4) CUT CAPITAL EXPENDITURES.  CENTRAL BANK GOVERNOR 
MALKUN ALSO EXPLAINED THAT THE SUPERINTENDENT OF BANKS WAS 
WORKING WITH THE IMF FOR A TEAM TO CONDUCT AN AUDIT OF THE 
BANKING SECTOR, AS REQUIRED IN THE AGREEMENT.  THEY EACH 
INDEPENDENTLY AFFIRMED THAT THE GODR WAS COMMITTED TO THE IMF 
PROGRAM AND TO FREE TRADE/OPEN ECONOMIC POLICY, UNDER WHICH 
THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC HAD PROSPERED IN THE LAST DECADE. 
MALKUN WENT SO FAR AS TO SAY THAT THE GODR WOULD COMPLETE THE 
REQUIREMENTS \"INDEPENDENT OF THE IMF TAKING FURTHER TIME TO 
REVIEW.\" 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
UNION FENOSA: THE MAIN OBSTACLE TO IFI SUPPORT 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
6.  (C)  WITH REGARD TO THE ELECTRICITY SECTOR, THE ECONOMIC 
TEAM WAS IN AGREEMENT THAT THE GODR HAD TO TAKE STEPS TO 
CORRECT THE SITUATION WITH UNION FENOSA.  MALKUN CONFIDED 
THAT HE HAD ADVISED THE PRESIDENT TO WAIT THE THIRTY DAYS THE 
IMF HAD REQUESTED BEFORE SIGNING THE AGREEMENT, BUT EACH DAY 
THE ELECTRICITY SITUATION WAS GETTING WORSE, AND THE 
PRESIDENT HAD APPARENTLY ALREADY MADE COMMITMENTS THAT HE 
FELT HE HAD TO KEEP.  TECHNICAL SECRETARY DESPRADEL TOLD THE 
CHARGE THAT THE PRESIDENT HAD INTELLIGENCE REPORTS ABOUT 
UNION FENOSA EMPLOYEES PROVOKING RIOTS.  DESPRADEL ALSO 
POINTED OUT THAT AT THE SAME TIME THE IMF WAS ASKING FOR 
THIRTY DAYS TO REVIEW THE AGREEMENT, THE IDB WAS DEMANDING 
REPAYMENT OF ITS LOANS.  HE EXPLAINED THAT THE ONLY WAY THAT 
PAYMENT COULD BE MADE WAS THROUGH AN AGREEMENT WITH UNION 
FENOSA.  ALL OF THE ECONOMIC TEAM MEMBERS NOTED THAT THE IMF 
HAD ORIGINALLY NOT CONSIDERED THAT AS A PARTNER WITH UNION 
FENOSA, THE GODR WAS OBLIGATED FOR HALF OF THE DISTRIBUTION 
COMPANIES\' DEBTS ALREADY.  THEY CLAIMED THAT THE GODR DEBT 
OBLIGATION ACTUALLY DECREASED UNDER THE REPURCHASE AGREEMENT, 
SINCE UNION FENOSA RETAINED SOME OBLIGATIONS. 
 
----------------------------- 
SOME SECTORS STILL PROSPERING 
----------------------------- 
 
7.  (C) FINANCE SECRETARY RAFAEL CALDERON REVIEWED THE 
COUNTRY\'S ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE LEADING UP TO THE CRISIS.  HE 
NOTED THAT THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC HAD WORKED HARD TO ATTRACT 
FOREIGN -- ESPECIALLY U.S. -- INVESTMENT, AND THAT THE 
DOMINICAN ECONOMY HAD LED THE REGION IN GROWTH FOR MOST OF 
THE PAST DECADE.  DESPITE THE MASSIVE BANK FRAUD AND 
SUBSEQUENT ECONOMIC CRISIS THAT PRECIPITATED THE IMF ACCORD, 
CALDERON POINTED OUT THAT CERTAIN SECTORS OF THE ECONOMY 
REMAINED STRONG.  HE AND DESPRADEL REPORTED THAT TOURISM, 
FREE TRADE ZONE EXPORTS, TRADITIONAL EXPORTS AND REMITTANCES 
FROM ABROAD WERE AT RECORD LEVELS, AFTER RECOVERING FROM 
DIFFICULT YEARS FROM 2000-2002, (WHICH HAD BEEN DIFFICULT 
PRIMARILY DUE TO THE SLOWDOWN IN THE UNITED STATES\' ECONOMY). 
 
 
-------------- 
THE ROAD AHEAD 
-------------- 
 
8.  (C) ALL OF THE INTERLOCUTORS STRESSED THE NEGATIVE IMPACT 
THAT THE CURRENT UNCERTAINTY WAS HAVING ON MACRO-ECONOMIC 
STABILITY.  CENTRAL BANK GOVERNOR MALKUN SAID THAT 
BUSINESSMEN HAVE BEEN HOUNDING HIM TO MAKE A REASSURING 
STATEMENT TO THE PRESS TO HELP STEM CAPITAL FLIGHT AND A 
FALLING EXCHANGE RATE.  THE ECONOMIC CABINET SAID IT WAS 
READY WITH THE INFORMATION NEEDED FOR THE IMF TALKS NEXT WEEK 
IN SANTO DOMINGO.  WHAT THEY NEED MOST TO AVOID ECONOMIC 
COLLAPSE, THEY SAID, IS THE SPEEDY RESTORATION OF THE 
ANTICIPATED IFI FUNDING.  THE GODR HAD INCLUDED THE IMF, IDB 
AND WORLD BANK DISBURSEMENTS IN ITS PROJECTIONS AND CLAIMS IT 
CAN NOT HOPE TO MEET IMF TARGETS WITHOUT IT. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
9. (C)  WE AGREE THAT FURTHER DELAY IN IFI DISBURSEMENTS WILL 
EXACERBATE A SALVAGEABLE SITUATION.  IN THAT REGARD, THE 
VISIT OF THE IMF TEAM NEXT WEEK IS GOOD NEWS.  ONE MAJOR 
STUMBLING BLOCK HAS BEEN REMOVED WITH GODR CONCURRENCE 
OCTOBER 7 TO CREATE AN INDEPENDENT COMMISSION OF 
INTERNATIONAL EXPERTS TO REVIEW THE ENERGY SECTOR AGREEMENT. 
AT OUR MEETING, WE FOUND PRESIDENT MEJIA CLEARLY FRUSTRATED 
BY THE LACK OF FUNDS THE GODR HAD COUNTED ON TO GET THEM 
THROUGH THE FALL.  HE WAS ACCORDINGLY SKEPTICAL OF THE 
BENEFITS OF THE IMF AGREEMENT AT THAT MEETING.  IN CONTRAST, 
HIS TOP ECONOMIC TEAM -- THE PEOPLE THE IMF WILL WORK WITH 
NEXT WEEK -- WERE CONVINCING IN THEIR COMMITMENT TO FULL 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE ACCORD.  THE IMF WILL WANT TO WORK 
THROUGH THE DEBT IMPLICATIONS OF THE UNION FENIOSA DEAL AND 
GET ASSURANCE ON HOW THE GODR WILL MANAGE THE ELECTRICAL 
SECTOR AND MEET ITS REVENUE COMMITMENTS. 
KUBISKE 
"
"11486","10/17/2003 16:46","03SANTODOMINGO5759","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 005759 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/16/2013 
TAGS: DR, PGOV, PINR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: DISPUTE OVER RE-ELECTION OF 
PRESIDENT MEJIA 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Hans Hertell for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary: The ruling Dominican Revolutionary Party 
(PRD) is wrangling internally over whether to nominate 
President Mejia as its candidate in the national election 
next May.  Other aspirants to the PRD nomination, arguing 
that presidential re-election violates party policy and that the unpopular Mejia will drag the PRD to defeat, are 
preparing to hold a \"plebiscite\" of party members on the 
re-election issue October 19.  Mejia and his PPH faction have called on the PRD rank and file to boycott the referendum and requested that it be banned by the GODR\'s Central Electoral Board.  Meanwhile, Mejia\'s rivals have failed to unite behind one candidate to challenge the President.  The possibility of an electoral defeat of the nation\'s biggest political party may add to public uncertainty arising from adverse economic conditions and corruption scandals.  However, Mejia\'s main opponent, former president (1996-2000) Leonel Fernandez, has 
his own vulnerabilities and is by no means assured of 
victory.  End summary. 
 
The Re-election Issue 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
2. (C) Last year, the Dominican Congress -- controlled by 
President Hipolito Mejia\'s PPH (Presidential Project 
Hipolito) faction of the PRD -- amended the constitution to 
permit presidential re-election for the first time since 
1994.  Subsequently Mejia announced his intention to run as 
the PRD candidate in the May 2004 election.  Seven other 
aspirants to the PRD nomination, including Vice President 
Milagros Ortiz-Bosch, Tourism Minister (and PRD Secretary 
General) Rafael \"Fello\" Subervi, and PRD President Hatuey 
Decamps, have publicly opposed this plan, arguing that it 
violates a PRD tradition of opposing re-election ever since 
the administrations of the late president Joaquin Balaguer 
and dictator Rafael Trujillo.  The challengers also argue 
that Mejia, who according to a recent international poll is 
the least popular elected president in Latin America, cannot win the election and will drag the PRD to defeat.  One influential PRD senator, who served as Mejia\'s campaign 
coordinator in the 2000 election, told poloff October 15 that if Mejia becomes the candidate, he will lose and \"bury the PRD.\" 
 
PRD \"Plebiscite\" 
- - - - - - - - - 
 
3. (U) To strengthen their hand, the challengers have 
mobilized party machinery to hold a \"plebiscite\" of all 1.6 
million PRD members on the re-election issue.  Originally set for October 12, the balloting of the membership is now to take place October 19 at party-organized and -manned polling places all over the country.  The printed ballots ask for a yes/no vote on the question, \"Do you agree that the PRD should change its anti-re-electionist position to permit the re-election of President Hipolito Mejia?\"  The organizers of the plebiscite believe it is not inconsistent with Dominican law or the PRD\'s statutes.  The PRD Elections Department chief has announced that preparations for the vote are nearly complete, with 4,000 polling sites and 25,000 workers.  A media notice has urged PRD members to show up at the sites October 19 at 8:00 a.m. 
 
President Mejia\'s Response 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
4. (U) President Mejia and other PPH leaders have called on 
the PRD rank and file to boycott the plebiscite, on grounds 
that the party statutes do not provide for such a grass-roots referendum.  They say the nomination should be decided at a national PRD convention, based on a recommendation from the PRD executive committee and discussion at a national plenary of party officials, as the rules stipulate.  Recently, Agriculture Minister Eligio Jaquez -- Mejia\'s campaign coordinator -- delivered a formal request to the GODR\'s Central Electoral Board (JCE) to declare the plebiscite \"null and void.\"  Non-PPH leaders filed a counter-argument that the JCE should not interfere in this internal party consultation.   The board is expected to issue an opinion before October 19. 
 
The Seven in Disarray 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
5. (U) The seven challengers met as a group 23 times to 
coordinate their positions, but failed in their effort to 
choose one candidate to confront Mejia or even to agree on a selection method, such as a rump convention or an opinion 
poll of PRD members.  The latest meeting October 15 broke up with the group in disagreement; Secretary General Subervi on October 16 announced he was pulling out and called on his followers to boycott the plebiscite.  However, Vice President Ortiz-Bosch and others appear to continue supporting the plebiscite and -- if a majority of participants votes \"no\" to re-election -- hope to use that result against Mejia in a national PRD nominating convention.  The seven also commissioned two recent polls of the general electorate, in both of which most respondents opposed Mejia\'s re-election. 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
6. (C) Many of the PRD\'s mid- and upper-level officials 
support Mejia, and none of the challengers has so far 
gathered enough momentum to overcome him.  We do not expect 
the outcome of the plebiscite, which because of the boycott 
will not represent the entire PRD membership, to 
significantly affect Mejia\'s chances of becoming the 
candidate.  He might prevail in the convention by negotiating with Subervi, who has so far rejected the possibility of accepting the vice presidential nomination.  Whether Mejia can then unify the party and win the election remains open to doubt, in light of the PRD\'s historical propensity to damaging internal splits.  Such rivalries in 1986 weakened the party enough to lose its ruling status and remain in the opposition for 14 years.  Even if Mejia pulls together the rival factions for the 2004 campaign, his low approval ratings will be a handicap, owing to a declining economy, high unemployment, financial crisis, and corruption scandals. 
 
7. (C) A prospect of defeat of the nation\'s biggest political party may add to widespread public uncertainty arising from the unfavorable economic conditions, perceived official ineptitude, and revelations of malfeasance.  However, a victory by Mejia\'s main opponent, former president (1996-2000) Leonel Fernandez of the Dominican Liberation Party (PLD), is by no means assured, given his own vulnerability to corruption charges and his party\'s relative weakness in the provinces. 
HERTELL 
"
"11488","10/17/2003 17:32","03SANTODOMINGO5768","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE283533","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005768 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR MCISAAC, WHA/PPC BATJER, WHA/USOAS 
FERRAO, PM SNIDLE, PM SUGARMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC, MARR, PREL, PARM, XM, XL, XS, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC\'S DELEGATES TO OAS SECURITY 
CONFERENCE 
 
REF: STATE 283533 
 
 The Foreign Ministry of the Dominican Republic informed 
Poloff that its delegation to the OAS Special Conference on 
Hemispheric Security will be led by Deputy Foreign Minister 
Miguel A. Pichardo and Ambassador Jesus Maria Hernandez, 
Director of UN and OAS issues for the Dominican Foreign 
Ministry. 
HERTELL 
"
"11510","10/20/2003 11:21","03SANTODOMINGO5786","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 005786 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR AND PRM; GENEVA FOR REFUGEE OFFICER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/09/2013 
TAGS: DR, IZ, KU, MARR, PREF, PREL 
SUBJECT: MFA LEGAL ADVISER ON REFUGEES, SOFA WITH KUWAIT, 
ARTICLE 98 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  MFA Legal Adviser Jorge Santiago told DCM 
(then-Charge) Kubiske October 9 that his office will begin 
full-time processing of a refugee case backlog before the end 
of the year and will soon submit to UNHCR a list of needed 
technical assistance and training for refugee contingency 
planning.  He also asked about any assistance the USG might 
provide.  DCM pressed Santiago for speedy conclusion of a 
SOFA with Kuwait, in connection with Dominican troops 
deployed in Iraq, but he expressed reservations about the 
Kuwaiti-proposed text.  Embassy followed up with further 
explanation of the SOFA provisions.  DCM also urged 
ratification of the GODR-USG Article 98 agreement, which 
Santiago said is awaiting receipt of comments from other 
government branches and civil society.  End summary. 
 
Refugee Planning and Processing 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
2. (C) The MFA legal adviser, Ambassador Jorge Santiago, in a 
meeting with DCM Kubiske (who was then Charge) and emboffs 
October 9, said he has \"reactivated\" the interagency National 
Commission on Refugees (CONARE), which he chairs.  CONARE had 
been \"inoperative\" under the previous administration 
(1996-2000).  He said UNHCR has recently agreed to provide 
technical assistance and training for contingency planning 
for potential massive refugee flows (Note:  From Haiti or 
Cuba.  End note.).  CONARE plans to meet \"in a few days\" to 
agree on priorities for specific assistance/training 
requirements to submit to UNHCR.  (Note:  In a previous 
meeting with UNHCR reps, CONARE -- after strong urging -- 
agreed to submit this request by October 15.  End note.) 
 
3. (C) Santiago said his office has \"three or four\" lawyers 
to deal with international legal issues in the MFA, the 
presidency, and other agencies and is swamped with cases. 
Nonetheless, he plans to hire a \"qualified\" person to review 
refugee petitions full time and is currently recruiting.  His 
goal is to process 200 cases by the end of CY 2003.  (Note: 
Local UNHCR rep Sandrine Desamours had told us previously 
there are \"at least 100 cases\" awaiting a CONARE decision. 
End note.) 
 
4. (C) The legal adviser said that in addition to UNHCR 
assistance, CONARE would be interested in any USG support 
that might be available.  He said he had discussed this at 
the Department during a recent visit to Washington, when he 
also met with UNHCR.  (Comment:  Embassy will explore 
possibilities.  End comment.) 
 
SOFA with Kuwait 
- - - - - - - - - 
 
5. (C) With regard to the proposed status of forces agreement 
(SOFA) between Kuwait and the Dominican Republic in 
connection with the approximately 300 Dominican troops 
participating in Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF), Santiago said 
that Kuwaiti comments on the GODR\'s proposed revisions to the 
draft text had been sent to the Dominican armed forces for 
their consideration.  Santiago posed several objections to 
the Kuwaiti-proposed text.  He also expressed interest in 
more U.S. input to the negotiation.  (Note:  Embassy\'s 
Military Assistance Advisory Group (MAAG) chief, at a 
follow-up meeting with Santiago on October 10, further 
explained the SOFA provisions.  End note.) 
 
6. (C) DCM urged that the SOFA be concluded within days to 
facilitate planned troop rotations, transit of TDY Dominican 
personnel through Kuwait, and any casualties.  She noted that 
the three other Latin American nations participating in OIF 
had already signed similar SOFAs.  She emphasized that the 
SOFA is a bilateral issue between Kuwait and the Dominican 
Republic and strongly encouraged the GODR to accept the 
Kuwaiti text. 
 
Article 98 Agreement 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
7. (C) DCM urged prompt ratification of the Dominican 
Republic\'s already-signed Article 98 agreement with the 
United States.  Santiago said he had advised President Mejia 
to submit the agreement to Congress for ratification only 
after comments on the text were received from the Supreme 
Court, Congress, the Dominican Red Cross, and NGOs.  These 
opinions would then be attached to the agreement and sent to 
the President, with a recommendation regarding ratification. 
Santiago offered to send us a copy of a GODR interim internal 
report on the agreement.  DCM reiterated U.S. interest in 
timely ratification.  (Comment:  We will follow up as 
necessary to ensure this happens.  End comment.) 
HERTELL 
"
"11574","10/22/2003 10:59","03SANTODOMINGO5875","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","03SANTODOMINGO5759","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 005875 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/21/2013 
TAGS: DR, PGOV 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: PRD VOTES \"NO\" TO RE-ELECTION 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 5759 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Hans Hertell for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  PRD members, in a consultative \"plebiscite\" 
October 19, voted overwhelmingly against President Mejia\'s 
bid for re-election next May.  Turnout was respectable, but 
some voting procedures were questionable and the results were 
skewed by a boycott of Mejia supporters.  Both Mejia and his 
rivals for the PRD presidential nomination now appear willing 
to negotiate to unify the party and pick a candidate. 
Mejia\'s campaign chief told the Ambassador October 20 that 
the PRD can recover from its internal fight and convince 
voters to retain Mejia rather than bring back his main 
adversary, former president Leonel Fernandez (PLD).  However, 
the official acknowledged that national economic problems 
will hurt Mejia\'s chances.  End summary. 
 
Plebiscite Results 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
2. (U) The ruling Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD) held a 
\"plebiscite\" of its nationwide membership as planned October 
19 (reftel).  According to nearly complete results announced 
October 20, from 3079 of 3800 polling sites, 318,817 voters 
(91 percent)of a total of 349,207 voted \"no\" to the question 
of whether the PRD should \"change its anti-reelectionist 
position to permit the re-election of President Hipolito 
Mejia,\" versus 23,448 (7 percent) who voted \"yes\" and a 
smaller number blank or nullified votes.  The Central 
Electoral Board (JCE) had rejected the request by President 
Mejia\'s PPH faction to stop the referendum, noting that it 
would be \"consultative\" and not binding.  Journalists 
observed a low turnout at many polling sites and lax 
procedures such as voting by persons not listed on the PRD 
rolls and lack of privacy for casting ballots. 
 
Public Reactions 
- - - - - - - - - 
 
3.(U) Mejia and other top officials publicly downplayed the 
vote as \"a joke\" and \"a failure.\"  PRD president Hatuey De 
Camps and other pre-candidates for the party\'s nomination who 
backed the plebiscite characterized it as a reflection of the 
majority will, which Mejia should take seriously.  De Camps 
told the press that he would soon convene the PRD\'s National 
Executive Committee, which in turn could convoke a national 
convention to nominate the candidate.  However, De Camps 
dodged a question about whether Mejia would be allowed to 
register as a pre-candidate in the convention. 
 
Readout from Mejia\'s Camp 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
4. (C) State Secretary of Agriculture (and Mejia\'s campaign 
coordinator) Eligio Jaquez told the Ambassador October 20 
that the plebiscite was history and the action would soon 
move to a national convention.  Jaquez said that Mejia would 
begin negotiations October 21 with Tourism Minister Rafael 
\"Fello\" Subervi and Vice President Milagros Ortiz-Bosch -- 
both rivals for the PRD presidential nomination -- to unify 
the party and make possible a convention that would include 
Mejia and his supporters.  Jaquez noted PPH polls of PRD 
members indicating support for Mejia at 50 percent, Subervi 
at 17 percent, and Ortiz-Bosch around 12-13 percent. 
 
5. (C) Regardless of the PRD\'s internal splits, Jaquez 
expressed \"absolute confidence\" that the party\'s candidate, 
once nominated, could beat the main adversary in the May 
election, former president (1996-2000) Leonel Fernandez 
(Dominican Liberation Party - PLD).  Jaquez cited a poll 
showing greater support for the PRD than the PLD in the 
Dominican electorate.  He also claimed that leading bankers 
oppose Fernandez\'s election bid, out of fear that he might 
retaliate against them for revealing bank irregularities that 
triggered the BANINTER scandal earlier this year.  He 
asserted that the PRD\'s nationwide organization will be able 
to persuade the voters that the Mejia administration has done 
more for them, all over the country, than Fernandez did. 
However, Jaquez acknowledged that the national economic 
downturn and financial crisis could seriously hamper Mejia\'s 
campaign. 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
6. (C) Given the disarray among Mejia\'s challengers for the 
PRD nomination (septel), it seems probable that he will 
negotiate successfully with his rivals and prevail in the PRD 
nominating convention.  The plebiscite had a respectable 
turnout for a consultative vote, but polling procedures left 
much to be desired and the results were skewed by the boycott 
of PRD members who supported Mejia and would have voted 
\"yes.\"  The wrangling PRD leaders now show signs of putting 
the disputed plebiscite behind them and negotiating a deal 
that would then be confirmed by the National Executive 
Committee and a nominating convention. 
 
7. (C) The PRD will need to pull together all of its forces 
to have a fighting chance in the the May election.  Many 
Dominicans recall Leonel Fernandez\'s term in office as a time 
of prosperity and blame Mejia for the current economic 
problems.  Fernandez has potential vulnerabilities, but the 
divided PRD has not yet begun to attack them. 
HERTELL 
"
"11601","10/22/2003 21:40","03SANTODOMINGO5907","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE287999","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 005907 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, IO AND EB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/22/2013 
TAGS: DR, IZ, PREL, EAID 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC ON THE MADRID DONORS CONFERENCE 
ON IRAQ 
 
REF: A. (A) STATE 287999 
 
     B. (B) STATE 294287 
     C. (C) STATE 297170 
 
Classified By: Acting ECOPOL counselor Bainbridge Cowell for reasons 1. 5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Acting ECOPOL counselor delivered points Refs A-B in 
Spanish and Ref C in English to Acting International 
Organizations Director, Ambassador Rhadis Abreu de Polanco, 
on October 22.  She reiterated continuing support for the 
Coalition of the Willing and informed us that the GODR would be represented at the Madrid Donors Conference by Dominican Ambassador to Spain Vega Imbert.  She also promised to convey the points immediately to Deputy Foreign Affairs Secretary Miguel Pichardo.  We stressed the value of the GODR\'s diplomatic and material support to Coalition reconstruction efforts in Iraq, particularly the 300 Dominican troops already deployed with the stabilization force.  We asked to be informed of any further contribution the GODR might make in Madrid. 
 
2. (C) Comment:  We did not deliver this demarche at 
ambassadorial level for the following reasons:  The Dominican Republic is in the midst of a financial crisis, and the USG is pressing the GODR to comply with tough requirements for urgently needed IMF disbursements under a recently agreed standby arrangement.  It would be counterproductive to request  further Dominican financial or material contributions to the Iraq reconstruction effort beyond maintaining the current significant troop deployment.  We anticipate that the GODR will continue its consistent diplomatic support for Coalition of the Willing initiatives in the UN and Iraq. 
KUBISKE 
"
"11618","10/23/2003 23:49","03SANTODOMINGO5946","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","03SANTODOMINGO3256","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 005946 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), WHA/PPC (FALLS), G/TIP 
(LINDERMAN) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/23/2013 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, KJUS, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN CONGRESSMAN APPEARS IN COURT ON ALIEN 
SMUGGLING CHARGES 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 3256 (NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: CHARGE D\'AFFAIRES LISA KUBISKE FOR REASONS 1.5 (B/D) 
 
1. (U) Trial proceedings began on October 22 against accused alien smuggler Congressman Guillermo Radhames \"Ramos\" Garcia.   After months of evading police arrest before Congress reconvened in August, Garcia surprised observers by appearing before the Supreme Court without his attorneys.  Garcia announced that he would not renounce his parliamentary immunity, even though he had previously told the press that he would.  The Supreme Court ordered Garcia to reappear October 30 with his attorneys, at which time the case will be sent to a criminal tribunal.  A criminal tribunal is scheduled to hold a second hearing on December 3 after all witnesses have been notified to appear. 
 
2. (U) The judges designated an interpreter for the two 
Chinese nationals accused as co-conspirators and refused to 
release them on bail.  At least three employees of the 
Directorate of Migration, including a fired supervisor, had 
also been implicated, but according to local press were not 
subpoenaed in time to appear for the October 22 hearing. 
Attorney General Victor Cespedes told Ecopol counselor and 
poloffs that these three suspects had in fact been subpoenaed but had refused to accept the court order, and that they would be subpoenaed two more times before being arrested. 
 
3. (C) COMMENT: Garcia,s appearance before the Supreme Court was definitely a surprise move, made possible by the Attorney General,s submission, finally, of the documentation required for the Supreme Court to begin proceedings.  Cespedes, explanation regarding the missing additional defendants may have been too pat, since some of the accused have been imprisoned well over a year while the accused public officials remain free. 
KUBISKE 
"
"11647","10/24/2003 19:13","03SANTODOMINGO5992","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","03CARACAS5391|03SANTODOMINGO5391|03SANTODOMINGO5786|03SANTODOMINGO5946|03USUNNEWYORK2331","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 005992 
 
SIPDIS 
 
HONG KONG FOR PATRICIA FIETZ 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/24/2013 
TAGS: DR, EFIN, ETRD, MARR, MX, PGOV, PHUM, PREL, SMIG, SP, VE, XF, KCOR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC FM ON ECONOMIC, INTERNATIONAL, 
AND BILATERAL ISSUES 
 
REF: A. CARACAS 5391 (NOTAL) 
     B. SANTO DOMINGO 5946 (NOTAL) 
     C. SANTO DOMINGO 5786 (NOTAL) 
     D. USUN NEW YORK 2331 
     E. SANTO DOMINGO 5391 (NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: Charge Lisa Kubiske for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  Foreign Secretary Guerrero Prats, at a lunch 
hosted by the Ambassador October 7, said the GODR was trying 
through diplomatic channels to restore normal relations with 
Venezuela after President Chavez downgraded them in 
September.  Trade/economic adviser (and daughter of President 
Mejia) Carolina Mejia said the GODR was doing its utmost to 
comply with IMF requirements in the face of severe financial 
problems.  She blamed traditional corrupt behavior in 
business for the massive BANINTER banking scandal.  The 
Ambassador and DCM Kubiske stressed the need to prosecute key 
suspects in the scandal and officials who may be trafficking 
in persons or smuggling aliens.  The foreign secretary 
generally agreed with our stance on returning full authority 
to the people of Iraq and said the GODR was reviewing a draft 
SOFA with Kuwait to support Dominican troops in the region. 
He expressed optimism about WTO and hemispheric trade 
negotiations.  End summary. 
 
2. (U) Ambassador Hertell hosted a lunch October 7 for 
Secretary of State for Foreign Relations Francisco Guerrero 
 
SIPDIS 
Prats, U/S of State for Foreign Relations Miguel Pichardo, 
U/S of State for Foreign Relations in Charge of Trade 
Negotiations Santiago Tejada, Acting Director of 
International Organization Affairs Jesus Hernandez, and 
FTAA/monetary affairs/TIC adviser Carolina Mejia.  DCM 
Kubiske, CG Marshall, ECOPOL counselor, poloff, and econoff 
also attended.  (Note:  We understand that Tejada has just 
been reassigned as the General Manager of the Central Bank. 
IO Director Hernandez is now permanently assigned to his 
position.) 
 
IMF Agreement 
- - - - - - - 
 
3. (C) The Ambassador expressed concern that the IMF team in 
town  earlier in the week had departed after a single day. 
Carolina Mejia, the President\'s daughter who is involved in 
GODR economic and trade issues, seconded by the foreign 
secretary, replied that the government was doing its utmost 
 
SIPDIS 
to analyze the situation and take corrective action to comply 
with the requirements of the IMF standby agreement.  Some 
adverse events were beyond the administration,s control ) 
e.g,. a recent decision by the Supreme Court that the use of 
a presidential decree to impose a 5 percent tax on exports 
and 2 percent on imports was unconstitutional.  The foreign 
secretary commented that this was an example of judicial 
 
SIPDIS 
independence typical of mature democracies.  Carolina Mejia 
added that an IMF staffer was in country, and as soon as the 
GODR assembled the required data, the IMF team would return. 
(Note:  We understand that one or several IMF staff are still 
here, working with the GODR on an unofficial basis.) 
Carolina Mejia said that the country desperately needed the 
United States\' assistance in seeking prompt disbursement from 
the IFIs. 
 
Relations with Venezuela 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
4. (C) On GODR efforts to restore relations with Venezuela 
after President Chavez,s withdrawal of his ambassador and 
cutoff of oil supplies to the Dominican Republic (Ref A), 
Guerrero Prats referred to President Mejia,s public 
statement October 6.  Guerrero Prats said that the Foreign 
Relations Secretariat is looking into Chavez,s public 
allegations of anti-GOV plotting here, that the foreign 
secretary has received instructions on this matter, and that 
 
SIPDIS 
\"I do not discuss diplomatic issues on television.8 
Guerrero Prats expressed regret that Chavez in early October 
reiterated the charges he had made in mid-September when 
downgrading relations with Santo Domingo. 
 
5. (C) According to the foreign secretary, the GOV after 
months of levying accusations in the media sent a diplomatic 
note August 4 citing \"denuncias\" of the anti-GOV plots -- 
without furnishing any evidence -- and requesting 
investigation by the GODR.  Santo Domingo, by diplomatic note 
22 days later, asked Caracas to furnish &proof8 and offered 
to investigate on the basis of any evidence that might be 
presented.  So far the GOV has failed to provide specifics. 
Guerrero Prats and his colleagues expressed their desire to 
normalize relations with Venezuela, referring to a history of 
close ties and the desirability of having the option to 
resume oil imports -- even though the Dominican Republic is 
now able to tap alternative suppliers.  (Note:  The two 
countries have been discussing the issue in diplomatic 
channels, but the oil cutoff remains in effect.) 
 
Prosecution of Corrupt GODR Officials 
- - - - - - - - - - -  - - - - - - - - 
 
6. (C) Earlier, as guests were gathering, the Ambassador, 
DCM, and Consul General spoke privately with the foreign 
secretary, urging investigation of a former Dominican consul 
 
SIPDIS 
in Panama named Arias and the current director of the 
Dominican commercial office in Hong Kong for involvement in 
visa fraud and trafficking in persons.  (Note:  Embassy had 
previously provided details of this suspected malfeasance to 
the Foreign Secretariat.)  Guerrero Prats replied that no one 
had supplied evidence in these cases, only supposition.  With 
evidence, he said, he would pursue them.  During the lunch, 
the DCM underscored the importance we attach to the GODR\'s 
pending prosecution of Dominican Congressman Guillermo 
Radhames Ramos Garcia (of the ruling PRD), a suspected 
smuggler of Asian nationals from Haiti into the Dominican 
Republic.  (Note:  The Supreme Court has begun hearing this 
case, as reported Ref B.) 
Iraq 
- - - 
 
7. (C) The Ambassador noted U.S. circulation of a draft 
resolution on Iraq in the UNSC October 2, on achieving a 
political transition as quickly as possible and returning 
full authority to the Iraqi people, and the Secretary\'s 
emphasis in comments to the press on a major role for the UN. 
 The Ambassador asked the GODR to support this proposal.  He 
also expressed appreciation for the bravery of Dominican 
troops in the stabilization force, who had taken fire twice 
in early October, without casualties.  Guerrero Prats 
referred to his September 30 UNGA speech, in which he urged 
restoration of sovereignty in Iraq. 
 
SOFA with Kuwait 
- - - - - - - - - 
 
8. (C) The Ambassador expressed concern about the slow pace 
of negotiations on a status of forces agreement (SOFA) 
between the Dominican Republic and Kuwait.  U/S Pichardo 
replied that the GODR had proposed changes to the Kuwaiti 
draft text and had passed them along  to the Secretariat of 
the Armed Forces for comment.  The Ambassador stressed the 
urgency of concluding the SOFA, to facilitate troop rotation 
and treatment of any casualties from the Dominican unit in 
Iraq.  (Note:  As reported Ref C, Embassy continues to work 
closely with Foreign Secretariat Legal Adviser Jorge Santiago 
to answer the GODR\'s questions on the draft SOFA.) 
 
Trade and the WTO 
- - - - - - - - - 
 
9. (C) The Ambassador and DCM complimented the GODR for its 
positive contribution at the Cancun WTO ministerial. 
Guerrero Prats agreed that the Dominicans have won respect 
for their consistent support of free trade and for promptly 
submitting required documents in any negotiation.   U/S 
Ambassador Santiago Tejada took a more optimistic view of the 
Cancun outcome.  He said that contrary to appearances, 
Brazil, leading the developing nations that opposed U.S. and 
European positions, had been isolated in the Western 
Hemisphere and that Mercosur and the Andean Group had been 
deeply divided.  Tejada said that there had been consensus on 
at least two of the Singapore issues, which boded well for 
progress at the next WTO meeting in Geneva December 15.  He 
added that the GODR was surprised by the early termination of 
the ministerial, explaining that from his perspective furhter 
negotiations might have been fruitful. 
 
10. (C) The Ambassador said that U.S. authorities looked 
forward to negotiation of a bilateral trade agreement.  The 
Foreign Secretary replied that the GODR already agreed with 
75 percent of the draft and believed the remainder could be 
finished within the timeframe (early 2004) necessary for 
&docking8 with a Central American Free Trade Agreement 
(CAFTA). 
 
Banking Scandal 
- - - - - - - - 
 
11. (C) Carolina Mejia blamed the massive collapse of 
BANINTER and two other banks on longstanding behavior 
patterns among wealthy Dominican businessmen, some of whom 
were \"thieves\" (\"ladrones\").  She said this was an old Latino 
scam ) profiting from other people,s money.  The government 
had done its job properly, she asserted.  (Former) GODR Bank 
Superintendent Alberto Atallah and the U.S. accounting firm 
Price Waterhouse approved the banks, performance based on 
the data the firm had received, but many illegal transfers 
were hidden from the auditors.  The impact of the Baninter 
collapse in spring 2003, followed by the takeover of two 
smaller banks due to insolvency, has been &very hard,8 she 
commented, but perhaps this ordeal was necessary to force the 
country to modify the corrupt behavior.  According to Mejia, 
the fault lay in the society, not the government.  To create 
the kind of society that younger Dominicans such as she 
wanted, the government would have to prosecute the persons 
responsible for the banks\' collapse.  The DCM strongly 
concurred with this point. 
 
UNGA 
- - - 
 
12. (C) Regarding the UNGA special emergency session on the 
Middle East September 19 (Ref D), the Ambassador asked why no 
GODR representative had attended or voted.  The Dominican 
absence had been noticed in Washington.  The foreign 
secretary said the Dominican Republic prefers to vote within 
 
SIPDIS 
blocks on these types of measures and suggested that the USG 
should have approached regional groupings such as GRULA or 
the Rio Group to elicit support for the U.S. position, rather 
than relying on bilateral demarches.  If this is not 
possible, he said, the GODR varies its voting behavior on 
unhelpful resolutions ) sometimes voting no, sometimes 
abstaining, and sometimes being absent/not voting. 
 
Presidential Visit to Spain 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
13. (C) The foreign secretary said that President Mejia\'s 
September 15-23 visit to Spain and other countries had run 
into glitches, particularly in Spain where the media 
emphasized GOS leaders\' criticism of the Dominican Republic\'s 
treatment of foreign investors.  This referred to Spanish 
investors\' problems in the electricity sector and the GODR\'s 
October 1 renationalization of two power distribution firms 
(Ref E).  Guerrero Prats said he had publicly thanked the 
Spanish brigade commander in Iraq for having pressed for 
delivery of equipment to the approximately 300 Dominican 
troops deployed with the stabilization force.  (Note:  The 
equipment was delivered promptly.) 
 
President Mejia,s Government 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
14. (C) Carolina Mejia said that when her father Hipolito 
Mejia assumed office as president three years ago, he had no 
idea what challenges his administration would face.  In her 
view, his election in 2000 was providential.  Confronted with 
severe economic problems, he has tried to address these 
issues and give the country its best government ever.  She 
said his controversial bid for reelection in 2004 is 
necessary to enable him to finish the job. 
 
Draft Dominican Law on Migration 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
15. (C) The Ambassador inquired about progress on a draft 
migration law, designed to ensure fair treatment for one 
million Haitian immigrants present in the Dominican Republic, 
and urged expeditious handling of the legislation.  He noted 
that Congressional leaders had complained of a delay in 
receiving comments on the bill from the Secretariat of 
Foreign Affairs.  The Secretary said the comments were ready 
and he or U/S for Consular Affairs Wenceslao Guerrero Pou 
would offer to brief the relevant committees.  (Note:  The 
bill has been passed by the Chamber of Deputies, but is still 
pending in the Senate.) 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
16. (C) The lunch afforded an opportunity for the Ambassador 
to press the Foreign Secretariat -- and the President through 
his daughter -- on pending bilateral issues, which the 
Embassy will continue to pursue.  These include the GODR\'s 
IMF commitments, prosecution of key suspects in the banking 
scandal, and legal action against officials who may be 
trafficking in persons or smuggling aliens. 
 
17. (C) Concerning the Palestinian UNGA resolution, on the 
date of the special session on the Middle East, Foreign 
Secretary Guerrero Prats had to deal with the mini-crisis 
 
SIPDIS 
with Venezuela and thus delayed his arrival in New York.  He 
may not have sent guidance to the GODR permrep, who 
consequently was left free to avoid the controversial 
resolution.   Under other circumstances we believe the GODR 
might have attended but abstained. 
KUBISKE 
"
"11648","10/24/2003 22:50","03SANTODOMINGO5998","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE299908","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 005998 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR TOM SHANNON; TREASURY FOR U/S TAYLOR, N LEE, L 
LAMONICA; DEPT PASS AID 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/24/2005 
TAGS: EFIN, PREL, ETRD, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN FINANCE OFFICIALS ACKNOWLEDGE NEED TO 
WORK WITH IMF 
 
REF: A) STATE 299908 B) LAMONICA/URS/KUBISKE E-MAIL 
 
     10-24 
 
Classified By: Charge d\'affaires Lisa Kubiske.  Reason: 1.5 b & d. 
 
1.  (C) Summary. On Oct 24, in reply to delivery by Charge of 
ref A demarche on the importance of GODR fulfillment of 
obligations unders its IMF standby agreement, Dominican 
Secretary of Finances Calderon and Central Bank Governor 
 
SIPDIS 
Malkun each confided separately that the GODR has been taking 
the standby agreement seriously and continues to work, with 
unofficial consultative help from the IMF, to meet its 
program obligations.  Indeed, Malkun said, the GODR\'s drastic 
cut in spending has met IMF targets, although raising 
revenues in ways permitted by Dominican law remains a 
problem.  Calderon asked for help in obtaining release of the 
IDB social sector loan disbursement of USD 100 million.  End 
summary. 
 
FINANCES 
 
2.  (C) On October 24 Charge presented talking points from 
reftel a to Finance Secretary Calderon, explaining that this 
formal approach was evidence of deep USG concern about the 
GODR situation.  Calderon replied that he had already spent 
half an hour on the telephone with Treasury U/S Taylor, who 
had expressed grave concern about Dominican economic figures 
and had noted the market\'s increasing discount of Dominican 
debt.  Calderon said that IMF staff are still in country, on 
an unofficial basis, and working closely with the Government. 
 He asserted that the GODR had managed to fulfill most of the 
performance criteria, but stressed that the delay of 
disbursements from the IDB and the World Bank was a major 
difficulty.  Calderon disagreed with the assertion that the 
debt ratio had risen above 50 percent of GDP.  The debt ratio 
was at 49 percent, following the conclusion of the IMF 
program, but the Union Fenosa buy-back would have \"minimal 
impact.\"  Initial evaluations in the press of the transaction 
had not taken into account the fact that the GODR was already 
a 50 percent shareholder in the enterprise; once its takeover 
of the assets is taken into account, there is a net decrease 
of USD 5 million in GODR exposure (sic). 
 
3.  (C) Calderon expects that the private evaluators of the 
electricity sector will finish their work \"by next week\" 
(Oct. 27-31) \"or by November 10 at the latest.\"  He expects 
that the IMF will be back to review the situation around 
November 15, with a view to recommending an adjusted 
agreement to the Board for approval on December 15. 
 
4.  (C) Revenue levels are the greatest concern for the GODR, 
particularly with the Supreme Court\'s overturning of the 
presidential decree imposing taxes on imports (the Dominican 
constitution does not provide for taxation by decree).  The 
Monetary Board has just raised the levy on exchange rate 
transactions for importers from 4.75 percent to 10.0 percent, 
effective over the next 14 months -- a measure which requires 
no congressional action.  Calderon said that private sector 
leaders argued last week with the GODR over draft legislation 
to tax exports, and the sides traded legal opinions on the 
matter.  Elena de Viyella, president of the leading 
manufacturers\' association CONEP, has told him that CONEP 
will provide \"alternative proposals\" next week. 
 
5.  (C) The Charge expressed concern that measures for new 
taxes on imports might affect broader trade relations. 
Calderon believed that \"across the board\" increases limited 
in time would not be problematic, since they would not 
discriminate among traded items.  Looking to the mid-term, he 
said, the GODR and the IDB are preparing projects for 
fundamental reforms of the taxation system, to be instituted 
in mid- or late 2004 (\"by the next government, which we 
expect to be this one!\"). 
 
6.  (C) The Finance Secretary pressed emboffs on the GODR\'s 
urgent need for funds and twice asked for help in obtaining 
disbursement of the USD 200m IDB social sector loan ahead of 
the IMF decision -- \"with the IMF\'s tacit approval.\" The 
Charge stressed that multilateral development banks and the 
IMF work very close together.  She again urged the need to 
come to terms with the IMF. 
 
CENTRAL BANK 
 
7.  (C) That same morning Central Bank Governor Jose Lois 
Malkun received Emboffs in his shirtsleeves, seated at his 
worktable piled with folders.  He listened attentively to the 
presentation and scanned the text of talking points.  The 
situation is difficult, he acknowledged, but the GODR is 
working very closely with IMF staff who are in country on an 
unofficial basis.  The financial impact of the Union Fenosa 
transaction is not clear, and interpretations differ. 
 
8.  (SBU) The Bank has withdrawn liquidity by issuing 
certificates of deposit, but the exchange market is being 
driven 90 percent by psychology, Malkun said.. 
 
9.  (SBU) Though the GODR has accumulated various arrears, 
generally of 20 to 30 days, Malkun hopes to be able to get 
current in debt service by early December. 
 
10.  (SBU) Malkun emphasized that the GODR\'s problem is 
revenue, not expenditures.  Malkun pulled out an IMF table 
from a folder in front of him and pointed to figures showing 
that third-term public consumption was down 4.6 percent, with 
third-term public investment down 57.7 percent (in comparison 
to one year earlier).  Malkun said that the GODR is meeting 
and in some cases surpassing its other fiscal targets. 
 
11.  (C) The President is aware of the IMF requirements, 
Malkun said, and is very unhappy that he can\'t carry out 
intended projects. This dilemma is a sort of \"political 
suicide\" for him.  Congress does not help, because of its 
reluctance to approve revenue measures. He does not like the 
new measures to tax exchange transactions for imports; the 
IMF permits levies in the range of 2 to 3 percent, but 7 to 
10 percent is excessive. 
 
COMMENT 
 
12.  (C)  These same GODR officials received the Ambassador 
and EXIMBANK officials earlier this week and discussed some 
of the same concerns.  Their immediate availability is an 
indication of the seriousness with which they take USG views. 
 Our impression is that they do indeed understand IMF 
concerns and requirements, and that they are giving straight 
advice to a president who understands it, even if he is not 
pleased by it. 
KUBISKE 
"
"11655","10/25/2003 15:27","03SANTODOMINGO6000","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE292556","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006000 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA/EPSC FOR LISTON, NSC FOR CRUZ, WHA/CAR FOR MCISAAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, ECON, KSUM, KDEM, XM, XL, DR 
SUBJECT: SPECIAL SUMMIT OF THE AMERICAS INFORMATION 
DELIVERED TO GODR 
 
REF: A. STATE 292556 
 
     B. STATE 295396 
 
1.  Reftel A and B points were delivered to Ambassador 
Francia Sencion, Director of the Americas Desk at the GODR 
Foreign Ministry, on October 22.  GODR Ambassador Jesus Maria 
Hernandez, who was identified in Reftel A as Summit 
Coordinator, is out of the country and unavailable.  Sencion 
will forward the points to Ambassador Hernandez upon his 
return.  Sencion also noted that the GODR\'s delegation has 
not yet been determined but that it is likely to include the 
Undersecretary of State for Economic and Social Issues, 
Rolando Galvan, to whom she will also pass the talking 
points.  Post will report substantive comment upon receipt. 
KUBISKE 
"
"11656","10/25/2003 15:27","03SANTODOMINGO6001","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE295420","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006001 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AC/ISN AND USUN (UNFCDEL) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM, PREL, MNUC, AORC, DR 
SUBJECT: UNGA FIRST COMMITTEE FOLLOW-UP DEMARCHE DELIVERED 
TO GODR 
 
REF: STATE 295420 
 
1.  (U)  Poloff delivered reftel talking points to Ambassador 
Francia Sencion, Director of the Americas Desk, and 
Ambassador Rhadis Abreu de Polanco, Deputy Director of the 
International Organizations Desk at the GODR Foreign Ministry 
on October 22.  Sencion indicated the points would be 
reviewed and the Foreign Ministry would be in contact with 
poloff.  Substantive comment will be reported septel. 
KUBISKE 
"
"11657","10/25/2003 15:27","03SANTODOMINGO6002","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE300129","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006002 
 
SIPDIS 
 
C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y (CHANGING CLASSIFICATION) 
 
FOR WHA/AND - BARCLAY AND WHA/USOAS - FERRAO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CO, DR, MX, PGOV, PREL, PTER 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE ON COLOMBIA AND OAS SPECIAL CONFERENCE - 
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
 
REF: STATE 300129 
 
1. Post on October 24 delivered talking points reftel, 
regarding the proposed side declaration of support for 
Colombia at the OAS Special Conference on Security, to MFA 
acting director of international organization affairs 
Ambassador Radhis Abreu de Polanco.  She informed us that our 
points had been passed the same day to Foreign Secretary 
Frank Guerrero Prats, in advance of his October 26 departure 
for Mexico.  He will lead the Dominican delegation at the 
meeting.  We will report any substantive reaction after his 
return. 
KUBISKE 
"
"11691","10/28/2003 11:03","03SANTODOMINGO6023","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03STATE279217","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 006023 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), DRL/PHD (GILBRIDE) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, KWMN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMESTIC VIOLENCE AND POLICE ABUSE CENTERS: HUMAN 
RIGHTS CONCERNS IN THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
 
REF: STATE 279217 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1. (SBU) Poloff and DRL Karen Gilbride called on human rights 
partners in Santo Domingo and Bani on October 20-21. In an 
effort to emphasize Embassy concerns with recent upsurges in 
domestic violence and continuing human rights abuses by the 
National Police, Poloff and DRL officer Karen Gilbride met 
with local counterparts, such as the Director of an 
Anti-Domestic Violence Center, the Secretary of Women, and 
Human Rights and Democracy Fund (HRDF) grantees selected to 
create police abuse prevention offices (reftel). Grantees 
were enthusiastically optimistic about establishing a 
database to catalogue complaints against police; they 
considered it a long overdue mechanism to help address human 
rights abuses.  Implementing partners include an 
unconventional mix of two respected human rights NGOs and the 
Dominican Government\'s Institute of Dignity and Humanity 
(IDIH), administrated by a Police General who is also a 
former Director of Prisons.  However, sustaining USG-funded 
projects (past and present) will require pressuring the GODR 
to fulfill its commitment.  Engagement by grantees is 
evident, but the GODR as a whole must back up its human 
rights responsibilities to the citizenry with action. End 
Summary. 
 
ANTI-DOMESTIC VIOLENCE CENTER LACKS RESOURCES 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
2. (U) On October 20 DRL officer Karen Gilbride, poloff and 
NAS program assistant traveled to Bani, a city in the 
southwestern province of San Cristobal, to meet with Bibiana 
Nunez, director of an Anti-Domestic Violence Center that was 
partially funded by NAS.  Director Nunez expressed 
frustration with the National Police (PN), the Attorney 
General\'s office and the Secretariat of Women for not fully 
implementing their contributions outlined in a Letter of 
Agreement (LOA) signed in 2002.  (Note: In September poloff 
and NAS program assistant met with Nunez, who at that time 
was preparing to avoid eviction from the original facility 
because the Secretariat of Women had not paid rent. End 
Note.)  Now comfortably re-located in a bigger facility, the 
Center continues to confront critical staff shortages and 
lack of operational support, including but not limited to: 
lawyers, a psychologist and a social worker that the 
Secretariat of Women agreed to provide, more Police 
 
SIPDIS 
protection, and a medical technologist and Internet 
connection to be provided by the Attorney General. 
 
3. (U) During the October 20 meeting with Director Nunez, 
Gilbride and Emboffs witnessed an interview of a family 
victimized by domestic violence and suspected sexual abuse of 
minors.  There were more than 50 men, women and children 
scattered inside and outside of the building, all waiting to 
talk with Ms. Nunez while she juggled the sensitive family 
interview, numerous phone calls and impatient clients. 
Except for two police officers, a volunteer handyman and a 
part-time community worker, there was nobody present to help 
Ms. Nunez maintain order.  She informed us that Mondays were 
typically busy, because domestic violence is most likely to 
occur on weekends.  She also said that her Center receives 
anywhere from 20-30 physical abuse cases monthly; local 
newspapers have reported that 110 women have been killed to 
date locally in crimes of passion, compared with 119 for all 
of 2002.  Ms. Nunez\' concerns included: lack of training for 
police officers assigned to the Center, lack of a 
psychologist, lack of a social worker, lack of a physician to 
evaluate sexual abuse victims, and general lack of support 
for domestic violence survivors.  Nunez praised USG 
assistance and noted that the Embassy was the only partner 
that had fully implemented its share of the LOA. 
 
GRANTEES COMMITTED BUT NEED LOGISTICAL ADVICE 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
4. (U) Gilbride and Emboffs met with the Institute of Dignity 
and Humanity (IDIH) Director General Manuel Perez Sanchez; 
Vielka Polanco, director of the Santo Domingo Human Rights 
Institute; Virgilio Almanzar, chairperson of the Dominican 
Human Rights Committee, a technical assistant from Hifab 
International (a Swedish consulting firm) and other IDIH 
staff to discuss implementation of the HRDF grant to create 
Police Abuse Prevention Offices.  The implementing partners 
represent an unusual mix of the PN and NGOs working together 
to acknowledge human rights problems in the police ranks*-a 
project the partners said may prove to be controversial if 
not dangerous in the long run. 
 
5. (U) IDIH, set up by the Mejia administration in 2001, 
already provides basic human rights courses to sensitize 
members of the PN; 9,000 PN personnel have received this 
training.  These courses are not mandatory, but General Perez 
Sanchez said he wants to change that culture.  He told us 
that this pilot project is critical to ultimately reducing 
extrajudicial killings and police harassment.  Almanzar is a 
respected activist who has followed human rights cases for 
more than 20 years.  As the chairperson of the Dominican 
Human Rights Committee, he is quoted frequently in local 
press concerning abuses.  Even so, he lacks the appropriate 
operational resources necessary to run his NGO efficiently. 
The HRDF grant is intended to give him the support he needs 
to further his objectives.  Also involved is Vielka Polanco, 
a lawyer who has worked at the Santo Domingo Human Rights 
Institute (IDHSD) since 1999.  Polanco has legal expertise 
and experience from working with academia on human rights 
curricula. 
 
6. (SBU) The discussion with implementing partners revealed 
unresolved logistical issues.  Gilbride raised concerns about 
victims, protection from disgruntled accused police 
officers, which the partners echoed.  General Perez Sanchez 
noted that the Law Against Domestic Violence has a provision 
for witness protection that could be applied in such 
instances.  Gilbride also questioned to what extent the 
Police Abuse Prevention Offices should be publicized, 
considering a likely increase in demand for services that the 
offices would be ill equipped to handle.  The partners agreed 
that too much publicity too soon could adversely affect the 
project.  Gilbride and Poloff agreed to provide partners a 
list of recommended next steps for their comment before money 
is disbursed. 
 
DESTACAMENTO IN BANI: THE BLAME GAME 
------------------------------------ 
 
7. (SBU) Secretary of Women Yadira Henriquez discussed with 
Poloff and McBride her concerns with the Bani anti-domestic 
violence center, locally referred to as the &destacamento8 
(&post8 or &station8).  Secretary Henriquez asserted that 
increasing domestic violence alarmed the Women\'s Secretariat 
and that the Bani destacamento had the Secretariat\'s full 
support.  When asked about the lack of agreed upon personnel 
in Bani, Henriquez responded that though the Secretariat\'s 
budget was minimal, a lawyer had been provided and a 
psychologist would be assigned soon.  She blamed the National 
Office for Personnel Administration (ONAP) for not approving 
personnel for Bani that the Women\'s Secretariat had 
recommended. (Note: ONAP is an office within the executive 
branch responsible for protecting civil servants, rights. 
End Note.) She said that it is more appropriate for the PN to 
fund most of these positions, because destacamentos 
countrywide fall under police jurisdiction.  Henriquez 
lamented, &The Women\'s Secretariat is not a traditionally 
respected institution like other ministries.8 
 
8. (U) In a separate meeting on October 23, Attorney General 
Victor Cespedes told Poloffs that he is also concerned with 
domestic violence problems.  As for the uninstalled Internet 
connection at the destacamento in Bani, he seemed not to 
recall offering that service.  He emphasized that Director 
Nunez needs to put all requests in writing and undertook to 
honor them.  (Note: Emboffs will raise this issue again in a 
follow-up courtesy call with the police chief, who was out of 
the country at the time of Gilbride\'s visit.  End Note.) 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
6. (SBU) Promoting human rights is and will continue to be a 
key Mission objective.  The HRDF grant money is timely, given 
local press reports of an increase in extrajudicial killings 
this year.  Implementing partners appear eager to get to 
work, and the logistical details should not be difficult to 
resolve with time.  The Attorney General himself addressed 
the perceived problem of an increasingly violent Dominican 
society in a press story a few weeks ago.  The upsurge in 
domestic violence can probably be attributed in part to a 
worsening economy and high unemployment, currently estimated 
at more than 16 per cent.  Budget constraints might also 
explain why the National Police, Attorney General and 
Secretariat of Women have been unable to dedicate more 
 
SIPDIS 
resources to the anti-domestic violence centers.  It remains 
to be seen whether the lack of money is a cover for a lack of 
political will. 
HERTELL 
"
"11728","10/29/2003 11:26","03SANTODOMINGO6075","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","03SANTODOMINGO5564","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 006075 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/ECPS AND EB/IFD/OMA; 
TREASURY FOR OASIA; NSC FOR SHANNON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/27/2005 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, ECIN, ENRG, EINV, DR 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR AND EXIM BANK METTINGS WITH PRESIDENT, 
ECONOMIC CABINET AND IMF 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 5564 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Hans H. Hertell; Reasons: 1.5 (B AND D) 
 
 
1. (C)  Summary: The Ambassador and Ex-Im Bank officials had 
a series of meetings October 20-21, with President Mejia, 
members of his economic cabinet and International Monetary 
Fund Representatives. Mejia expressed frustration about 
delays in disbursement of loans from the IMF and the 
multilateral development banks.  GODR officials reaffirmed 
their commitment to the Fund program; separately, IMF 
representatives said they were working closely with the GODR 
and noted problems in the energy sector and political 
pressures on the President. Embassy is submitting septel its 
assessment of the Dominican financial and political 
situation.  End summary. 
 
2.  (SBU)  On October 20-21 an EXIMBANK team accompanied the 
Ambassador for discussions of the Dominican financial 
situation and bilateral lending. The group called first on 
Technical Secretary Carlos Despradel, Central Bank Governor 
Jose Enrique Lois Malkun and Finance Secretary Rafael 
Calderon; on October 21 they met President Mejia and visiting 
IMF staffers. EXIM officials also had contacts with local 
bankers and the private sector. (Exim team consisted of 
Senior VP for Finance Jeffrey Miller, Senior VP for Credit 
and Risk Assessment John McAdams, Counsel Peter Gilbert, and 
Country Manager Kathy Flanigan.) 
 
-------------- 
Difficult times 
-------------- 
 
 
3.  (C) Technical Secretary Despradel reviewed the financial 
situation since the Baninter crisis emerged this past spring: 
the country has reduced imports 20-25 percent; even so, 
exports, tourism and remittances are at record levels. The 
GODR has reduced capital expenditures by 35 percent in 
nominal terms (60 percent if inflation is into acount). 
Inflation, running currently 35 percent, is a serious issue. 
One proximate cause has been  the \"tremendous outflow of 
capital.\"  Despradel acknowleged that the government had 
increased its payroll 6 percent. 
 
4. (C)  Despradel reiterated his reluctance to approve any 
new debt, including any Ex-Im financing, except for projects 
of the very highest priority to the President (for example, 
water projects and asphalt).  He said there was a lot of 
pressure on the President to approve costly projects, but he 
(Despradel) was opposed.  If he approved anything at all, he 
wouldn\'t be able to control political pressure on other 
projects and the GODR would not meet IMF limits. 
 
5.  (C) Finance Secretary Calderon commented that \"reports 
that arrive concerning the country are not always accurate.\" 
Calderon noted that the Dominican Republic had suffered 
external shocks over the past 2-3 years, \"like the rest of 
the world.\" These included the U.S. economic slowdown, the 
effects on tourism of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks and the 
Iraq war, oil price spikes, and Venezuela\'s cutoff of oil 
exports (\"a situation that will remain bad as long as Chavez 
is in power\").  On top of that, Calderon said, came the 
internal shock of Baninter, followed by two other bank 
failures, that have created a huge quasi-fiscal deficit. 
Calderon said that the GODR knew it had no choice but to 
assure monetary and fiscal discipline \"with or without an IMF 
agreement.\" 
 
 
6.  (SBU) Calderon said that despite all of these adverse 
factors, GDP growth for 2002 was  4.2 percent. Although IMF 
has projected a three percent contaction in 2003, the first 
six months of the year showed only minus eight-tenths 
percent.  He commented that exports for 2003 were at record 
levels; tourism was up 24 percent over last year, with hotel 
rooms \"fully booked\" until mid 2004; and remittances were up 
five percent over last year.   Economic statistics showed 
strong investment, even in the electricity sector.  (COMMENT: 
In contrast to this assurance, recent press reports show 
investment decreased more than 9 percent over last year, with 
its annual contribution to GDP down nearly half over the past 
five years -- from 7.91 percent contribution to GDP in 1999, 
to a projected 3.98 percent for 2003.) 
------------------------ 
Status of arrears to USG 
------------------------ 
 
7.  (C)  Calderon expressed surprise when Ex-Im bank asked 
about GODR arrears of USD 600,000 to EXIM for a power project 
loan and said he had already instructed the Central Bank to 
pay. 
 
8.  (C)  Central Bank Governor Lois Malkun told Ex-IM that 
the GODR was modestly in arrears to a number of creditors, 
and he could not say when Ex-Im might be paid.  The Governor 
did takee note that if the arrears persisted byond November 
15, Ex-Im would be taking steps to suspend lending. 
 
--------------------- 
Central Bank Outlook 
-------------------- 
 
9.  (C) Central Bank Governor Lois Malkun offered a less 
optimistic assessment.  He sees the GODR facing two principal 
problems: 1) a revenue shortfall, and 2) the consequences of 
the GODR decision not to honor the IMF\'s request to consult 
before buying out the shares of electricity distribution 
companies held by Spanish company Union Fenosa. Lois Malkun 
mentioned the President\'s frustration at the political 
obstacles to getting Congress to approve additional tax 
measures. Though the GODR had decreased expenditures, it had 
nevertheless acumulated USD 114 million in arrears in 
September -- a period for which the Fund agreement set a 
ceiling of USD 70 million in arrears.  Lois Malkun said that 
the GODR  had reduced arrears to USD 63 million by October 
14, but could not continue to pay \"without pesos.\"  The 
Governor said a priority for him was obtaining disbursement 
of IDB and World Bank loans.  He said that the GODR might 
need bridging finance.  He projected an improvement in the 
exchange rate and economic conditions by December. 
 
10.  (C)  Lois Malkun said that further serious problems had 
emerged in the banking sector  after conclusion of the IMF 
agreement.  Books at the failed Bancredito were not clear and 
might cause problems for the expected takeover of Banco 
Profesional by the Leon Jimenez Group. Even so, he expected 
the deal to be concluded very soon.  He said the Central Bank 
did not intend to issue certificates of deposit to back 
Bancredito depositors, as it had with Baninter.  (NOTE: we 
have heard from various sources that some CDs were issued 
quietly but then stopped.  End Note.)  The Governor said that 
other Dominican banks were in good shape and 40 auditors 
would arrive within the week to conduct the banking sector 
audit  required by the Fund agreement. 
 
 
----------------------------------- 
President\'s View: A Long Time Coming 
----------------------------------- 
 
11.  (C) President Mejia reiterated to the Ambassador and 
Ex-Im visitors his frustration at the slow disbursement of 
international financial institution (IFI) loans (reftel).  He 
pointed to incomplete projects in the country and said that 
in three-and-a-half years of discussions and negotiations, he 
had received nothing from the World Bank, despite its 
repeated promises to assist with the electricity sector.  The 
President blamed current economic problems on the banking 
sector crisis and said that subsequently, the IMF and IDB had 
paralyzed the country by not disbursing funds.  The President 
said that if he did not help the people in need it, he would 
be thrown out and that he could not wait for \"manna from 
heaven.\" 
 
12.  (C)  Mejia again defended his decision to repurchase 
from Union Fenosa two of the country\'s three electricity 
distribution companies. Union Fenosa management had been 
exploitive and corrupt; the company had left many unpaid 
debts behind. GODR officials had commented earlier that the 
repurchase would improve cash flow and reduced GODR debt 
(arguing that as a partner, the GODR was already responsible 
for half of the companies\' liabilities). 
--------------- 
Raising Revenue 
--------------- 
 
13.  (C) CB Governor Lois Malkun, also present along with the 
other officials, said the GODR was still working with 
Congress on passing a five percent export tax, but indicated 
there was not much support among members.  The Supreme Court 
recently declared unconstitutional the August presidential 
decree imposing the tax. Lois Malkun described the situation 
as \"complicated\" and said the GODR was working on other 
ideas.  He commented that real fiscal reforms would be 
impossible prior to presidential elections.  Technical 
Despradel was also pessimistic on that point: Congress would 
not approve any tax increase and the business community would 
not support any tax that could not be directly passed on to 
the consumer.  Despradel expressed concern that some elements 
of the GODR might propose some type of exchange rate control. 
 
14.  (SBU)  Calderon noted that the GODR did have sources of 
funds to pay foreign debt and that those funds could not be 
used for other purposes.  These included the 3 percent carbon 
tax (on fuel puchases), a two percent temporary import tax, 
the 0.15 percent check cashing fee, and the departure tax at 
airports, recently raised from USD 10 to USD 20. 
 
--------------- 
The IMF view 
--------------- 
 
15.  (C) IMF Country Manager Marcelo Figuerola and temporary 
Resident Representative Ousmene Mandeng told the Ambassador 
and visitors that the GODR was cooperating with the Fund. 
The President was heavily involved in all areas of the 
financial issues with \"the economic team taking orders.\" 
Figuerola acknowledged a rocky start to the standby with 
surprises in the banking sector and more fiscal and financial 
shortfalls than the GODR had initially estimated.  There had 
also been GODR delays in providing information, an economic 
team which appeared inexperienced in Fund procedures and not 
fully aware of Fund priorities. 
 
16.  (C) Figuerola identified three issues: 
 
-- The GODR\'s September approach to the Paris Club had caused 
concern.  It was not coordinated with the bank; the GODR was 
not facing a payments gap at that point. 
 
-- The GODR had continued to accumulate arrears. 
 
-- The impact of the Union Fenosa on fiscal balances was 
still unknown. The IMF had requested a 30-day delay, to no 
avail.  The GODR had proceeded, without taking into account, 
for example, the consequences for the World Bank electricity 
sector loan ready for approval within 2 weeks.  The Union 
Fenosa deal had raised questions of the degree of GODR 
commitment. As for the technical side, the GODR continued to 
assert that the electricity deal would not have a big impact. 
 Figuerola said IMF rarely got involved in energy sector 
issues, but in this case, problems in the sector were serious 
and the GODR needed to do something quickly. 
 
17.  (C)  The IMF rep said the GODR had moved forward in a 
number of areas, such as the banking sector audit and reforms 
and unification of the exchange rate. Further actions were 
required.  He could see that a core group in the 
administration was  committed to the Fund agreement, but, he 
said, \"they need support from others in government to take 
the necessary steps.\" 
 
18.  (C) The IMF was not negotiating yet. Figuerola said they 
were consulting and helping the independent commission 
evaluate the electricity sector.  The review might begin 
before the commission is entirely finished, but the IMF 
needed commission results to conclude their analysis. 
Figuerola said it was possible that the review could go to 
the board before the end of the year. 
 
19.  (C) The IMF confirmed that that the banking sector audit 
was underway and that the Fund continued to deal with the 
consequences of the three bank failures.  Figuerola echoed CB 
Governor Lois Malkun: Baninter was in the liquidation 
process, some issues remained with Bancredito, and the 
acquisition of Banco Mercantil by Republic Bank of Trinidad 
and Tobago had gone well.  His impression was that banking 
sector reforms were moving as they should, but results of the 
audits would be important. 
 
20.  (C) Debt is another key issue.   The devaluation had 
essentially doubled foreign debt, a serious problem for a 
government which \"likes projects.\"  The IMF reps said the 
GODR must determine its payment priorities within the limits 
of the agreement. The GODR would need to be very careful. 
Figuerola added that the GODR had provided the IMF with a 
list of assets it could sell if needed to help cushion the 
payment situation. 
 
21.  (C) The IMF team commented that presidential elections 
would make the situation more difficult, particularly because 
of the short-term political costs of austerity.  Popular 
expectations were always a problem, because reforms yielded 
evident gains only in the medium-term. 
 
-------- 
Comment 
-------- 
 
22.  (C) It is clear that the Dominican Republic is facing a 
difficult situation that may get worse in the next few weeks. 
 Septel provides Embassy\'s assessment.  Finance Secretary 
Calderon may be in the most difficult position, poised 
between IMF requirements and the President\'s desire for 
financing for priority projects such the proposals for Ex-Im 
for highways (asphalt) and water supplies. The Ambassador and 
emboffs continue to stress to the GODR at all levels the 
importance of working with the IMF and meeting the 
performance criteria.  At the same time, the GODR defenders 
of the IMF standby will find it politically easier once the 
GODR can access IFI funds identified for the electricity 
sector and social development. 
 
23.  (U) NOTE:  This cable was drafted after the departure of 
the EXIMBANK team. 
HERTELL 
"
"11762","10/30/2003 11:24","03SANTODOMINGO6123","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 006123 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/IFD; TREASURY FOR NANCY 
LEE, LLAMONICA; NSC FOR SHANNON; DEPT PASS USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/29/2008 
TAGS: PGOV, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT MEJIA VOWS FIRMNESS IN IMF COMMITMENT, 
INSISTS HE WILL KEEP BANINTER OFFICIAL IN JAIL 
 
REF: TD-314 55692-03 OF 29 OCTOBER 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Hans Hertell.  Reason 1.5(b) and (d). 
 
 1. (C) Speaking at length to the Ambassador on October 28, 
President Mejia emphatically took credit for seeking IMF 
support in mid-2003 and for his aggressive campaign to bring 
home to the business sector the need to meet IMF commitments. 
 He was particularly annoyed at the sluggish response of 
business sectors that were benefiting from devaluation: \"I 
said there was no alternative.  Do they expect the President 
to shut down the exchange houses, impose a government 
exchange rate and use force to collect revenue and control 
the population?  I will not do those things.  But I said they 
would have to come up with ways to finance the government 
budget.\"  Dominican businesses are \"not used to paying 
taxes,\" he commented, \"and they are bribing the Congress to 
block my tax bills. They are sadists.  They give me smiles 
and suggestions, but up until now they have not contributed.\" 
 He takes grim satisfaction that he has obliged hoteliers, 
free zone exporters and manufacturers to sign commitments to 
provide specific amounts on a \"voluntary\" basis until the tax 
code can be reformed in late 2004. 
 
REPRIVATIZATION OF THE \'EDES\' 
 
2.  (C) Mejia gave the Ambassador, DCM and EcoPol a copy of 
his just-published decree establishing a committee to report 
in 90 days to propose changes in laws and regulations to 
allow the privatization of the (ex-Union-Fenosa) electricity 
distribution companies serving the north and south, with 
specific provision for GODR ownership to be reduced to 25 
percent. 
 
BANINTER 
 
3.  (C) When Mejia mentioned the bankrupt Baninter in 
passing, the Ambassador told him that several persons had 
commented, following Mejia\'s visit last week to the Baez\'s 
father\'s home, that they expected to see \"Ramoncito\" Baez 
Figueroa out on bail soon.  Mejia was emphatic: \"If he gets 
out, I will put him right back in jail! I will have any of 
them arrested. Those people show a complete lack of respect. 
Their lawyers have gone over to embrace Leonel Fernandez and 
his foundation.\" 
 
4.  (C) The President showed the Ambassador thick catalogs 
detailing small-scale projects left unfinished for lack of 
government funding.  He spoke of his satisfaction at 
renovations he had authorized and carried out in the Puerto 
Plata area following the September earthquake, with much of 
the work done by the armed forces.  He spoke with distaste of 
the IFIs, emphasizing that he had received \"nothing\" from the 
World Bank in 40 months. 
 
5. (C)  The ruling PRD will have its convention in three 
weeks, Mejia said.  He expects to win easily; his supporters 
hold 60 percent or more of PRD offices. 
 
EXTRADITIONS 
 
6.  (C) The Ambassador provided a list of 21 fugitives whose 
extradition was pending the required presidential decree. 
Mejia called in a legal technician, who stated that the 
paperwork had not yet arrived from the Supreme Court.  \"Find 
it,\" said Mejia.  \"We don\'t want these people here. Give me 
the decrees tomorrow.\" 
 
COMMENT 
 
7. (C) Despite the characteristic force and bark of his 
remarks, Mejia was evidently in a good mood.  He responded 
well when the Ambassador urged him to continue his 
leadership, private and public, for the IMF commitments.  The 
President turned to the recently arrived EcoPol chief to 
comment, with satisfaction, \"You won\'t find a country like 
this anywhere else in Latin America, or any President who 
will tell the Americans as straight-out as I do.\" Fresh from 
a successful bout with business interests, he appeared to 
relish the prospect of getting back into the barrios and up 
on the stage at the party convention. 
HERTELL 
"
"11763","10/30/2003 11:24","03SANTODOMINGO6124","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","03SANTODOMINGO5998","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 006124 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA:DESHAZO, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC,EB/IFD; TREASURY 
FOR INTERNATIONAL - NLEE,LLAMONICA; NSC FOR SHANNON; WHITE 
HOUSE FOR USTR: GASH-DURKIN. 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/29/2005 
TAGS: EFIN, PREL, PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: EMBASSY ASSESSMENT OF DOMINICAN ECONOMIC SITUATION 
AND GODR POLICY 
 
REF: A) SANTO DOMINGO 5998 B) E-MAIL ESMITH WHA/CAR - 
     KUBISKE 10-24 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Hans Hertell.  Reason: 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1.  (C) Summary.  The Dominican Republic is moving into very 
dangerous and uncharted waters. Facing an unstable financial 
situation with the prospect of a downward economic spiral, 
President Mejia and his senior advisors have publicly 
stressed the need to meet IMF standby conditions.  They moved 
on October 23 to raise flagging GODR revenues by imposing a 
5.25 percent increase in the levy on imports and then by 
pushing key business sectors to sign voluntary commitments 
equivalent at current rates to about USD 10 million per 
month. The work-up by IMF consultants shows the GODR meeting 
public sector expenditure targets; our scorecard indicates 
that various requirements for structural reform are 
incomplete.  Price rises, the steady erosion of the peso, and 
sporadic demonstrations worry the GODR.  Presidential 
Technical Secretary Carlos Despradel visits Washington this 
week to ask for a previously approved 100m IDB disbursement 
for the social sector. The USG response to Dominican concerns 
provides an opportunity to fortify Mejia and his officials 
against those in his PPH political faction who prefer to 
ignore IMF discipline for the presidential election season. 
See paras 12-14 for assessment.  End summary. 
 
DILEMMA: GOOD OF THE NATION VS. PRIVATE ADVANTAGE 
 
2.  (C) In response to request ref b for its assessment of 
current economic conditions and their implications, Embassy 
Santo Domingo considers that the Mejia administration 
understands the medium- and long-term benefits to the economy 
of prompt and strict compliance with IMF prescriptions but is 
struggling with strong resistance from political and economic 
interests that focus strictly on short term advantage. 
 
IMF COOPERATION 
 
3.  (C) Dominican financial officials have repeatedly 
stressed in private to emboffs over the last ten days that 
the delayed IMF standby arrangement is the only solution to 
the steadily eroding macroeconomic situation.  They tell us 
that they continue to work closely with IMF staffers here on 
an unofficial basis. Their fiscal worksheet (faxed to WHA/CAR 
and Treasury) shows the GODR in compliance with the IMF 
target on spending.  Their shortfall on revenue targets is 
estimated at RD pesos 1.07 billion per month (about USD 28.5 
million). 
 
REVENUE EFFORTS: A PATCHWORK 
 
4. (C) The President is leading the effort to raise 
collections, stymied by his inability to date to convince his 
majority in Congress to apply the desired 5 percent tax on 
exports. (His attempt to impose the tax by decree was voided 
by the Supreme Court.)  The Senate has just postponed its 
consideration of the bill for another week.  On October 23 
the GODR secured passage by the Monetary Board of an increase 
in the levy on foreign exchange used for imports from 4.75 
percent to 10.0 percent, avoiding the need to resort to the 
Congress.  Presidential Technical Secretary Carlos Despradel 
estimates that this measure will bring in between 450 and 500 
million pesos. (We do not know whether his staff has taken 
into account the probable drop in import volumes due to 
sharply higher costs of foreign goods due to inflation and 
steady devaluation.)  The government had previously 
implemented a temporary two percent import tax that remains 
in effect. 
 
5. (C) To bridge the remaining 500-600 million peso gap, on 
October 24 and 27 the President resorted to confrontational 
jawboning of 35 influential business leaders. He has 
convinced  tourism operators, exporters and free trade zone 
companies that it is in their own interest to help meet the 
IMF\'s requirments.  Each has signed or will sign a formal 
agreement this week specifying contributions which, all told, 
will raise RD pesos 375 million/month. Costs will be passed 
along almost entirely to consumers, except by the untaxed 
free zone (FZ) exporters. (FZ companies, earning foreign 
currency, have benefited directly from devaluation; they will 
make a \"contribution\" indexed to the exchange rate).  CONEP, 
an umbrella business organization, has promised to present a 
proposal to President Mejia on October 29 on further means of 
raising the needed funds. 
 
STRUCTURAL CRITERIA - IN PROGRESS, NOT THERE YET 
 
6.  (SBU) Progress on structural performance criteria has 
been slower than the IMF had initially prescribed.  According 
to Central Bank staff: 
 
- - Exchange-rate changes are vitually complete; the by-law 
implementing the Lombard and overnight windows has been 
approved except for one aspect that the Central Bank expects 
to resolve the first week of November. 
 
- -  The GODR is on track with disposing of the assets of 
failed BANINTER and with selling Banco Mercantil. The 
discovery of shady practices at Bancredito may require 
judicial prosecutions but should not slow down liquidation of 
the bank. 
 
- - Authorities are reviewing comments from the banking 
community on proposed regulations for implementing the 
Monetary and Financial Law. 
 
- - The Law for Bank Resolution is with Congress, and the 
Central Bank\'s Monetary Board will meet the congressional 
leadership during the first week of November. 
 
- - The Government is still consulting with the Fund 
concerning a Financial Crime Bill. 
 
- - On October 28 Mejia issued a decree setting up a 
commission to report back within 90 days on procedures and 
legal changes required in order to reprivatize the 
electricity distribution companies run by Union Fenosa.  He 
named a widely respected businessman to direct this work. 
 
7.  (C) Posing a question mark to these steps is last week\'s 
Congressional approval of bonds to refinance about 5 million 
pesos (USD 140 million) of the debt of government-owned Banco 
de Reservas and the agricultural bank. Though the transaction 
is presented as a \"wash\" -- new Central Bank debt retiring 
claims on Reservas and the agricultural lender -- we are 
seeking to identify the intended uses and beneficiaries of 
this money. 
 
POLITICAL AND SOCIAL PRESSURES 
 
8.  (C) Dominicans are suffering from accelerating inflation, 
the steadily eroding peso exchange rate, and persistent 
electricity blackouts.  To date, commentators have blamed 
Mejia and his administration and no one has publicly 
questioned the need for IMF assistance. Bad news is the 
staple of the day and no one is expecting things to get 
better.  The prospect of social unrest disquiets many (for 
example, leading newspaper \"Hoy\" displayed a full color 
front-page photo of street demonstrators attempting to set 
off a homemade bazooka.) 
 
9.  (SBU) Among points to note: 
 
- - Inflation is up from 8 percent in CY 2002 to near 40 
percent predicted for CY 2003. Households face 50-100 percent 
increases in staples such as milk, cooking oil, meats, rice, 
beans and cereals. Medicines are up 30 percent. Regular 
gasoline has gone up about 40 percent since January. 
 
- - Record numbers of Dominicans are attempting the hazardous 
journey by boat to Puerto Rico.  Prospective illegal 
immigrants to the United States now include some from the 
middle class. 
 
- - The press regularly reports reduced services or closures 
of public health facilities. 
 
- - Government social spending is at a standstill and even 
salary checks are delayed. 
- - Electricity blackouts will get much worse before they get 
better. Available supply nationwide is 1463 megawatts, for 
estimated peak demand of 1855 megawatts.  Plants are running 
out of fuel.  Next week capacity will fall 250 megawatts and 
by mid-November two additional plants will probably shut down 
for lack of GODR payment, bringing capacity down to about 750 
megawatts.  The South (including the traffic-choked capital, 
Santo Domingo) will begin to experience the persistent 
failures like those which provoked street protests in the 
North. 
 
 
IMF-BASHERS 
 
10.  (C) Our GODR interlocutors have told us that some parts 
of the government and political parties want to take an 
aggressive approach to the IMF. President Mejia emphatically 
rejected such a course when speaking to the Ambassador on 
October 28, but he acknowledged that these sentiments exist. 
 
11.  (C)  The armed forces have not shown any desire to blame 
the IMF, even though their institution is largely immobilized 
by budget shortfalls.  The military leadership is loyal to 
the PRD. 
 
12.  (C)  We believe that the President\'s own \"PPH\" faction, 
chaired by Agriculture Secretary Eligio Jacquez, is the most 
restive.  They face the dilemma of a virtually certain 
renomination of Mejia in late November without any clear 
prospect at this time for a winning electoral strategy.  They 
are probably tempted to push Mejia to ignore Fund constraints 
and to borrow and spend to bolster his campaign against 
Leonel Fernandez of the PLD.  The PRD-dominated legislature 
is probably uneasy, as well, as constituents feel the 
economic plight. 
 
ASSESSMENT 
 
13.  (C)  Technical Secretary Carlos Despradel told us on 
October 24 that the Government can \"get along\" through the 
end of the year, but would be able to do nothing more than 
pay salaries.  (In fact, we understand that paychecks have 
been delayed; the Government is in arrears to civil 
servants.)  Despradel was visibly unhappy and tense when he 
visited the Ambassador on October 27 to ask for USG sympathy 
in obtaining release of the USD 100 million disbursement 
pending at the InterAmerican Development Bank to complete a 
Social Sector loan. 
 
14.  (C)  There is a difference between \"getting along\" and 
the more important consideration of keeping the GODR 
committed to structural adjustment. We need the Mejia 
administration to stay on board.  We are sailing into a storm 
right now; financial indicators, already unstable, are likely 
to take a vigorous kick when the public begins to react to 
further deterioration in their daily living conditions. 
September protests and riots in the North were prompted 
largely by mischief-making local opposition politicians. 
Unless the President can convince the Dominican public that 
relief, though distant, is in sight, we see a possibility of 
real conflict in the streets, across the country. 
 
15.  (C)  President Mejia vows that he will not beg; he says 
that he would prefer to resign rather than to order 
repression.  Some of this is characteristic Hipolito 
exuberance, but he pointedly cited to the Ambassador, several 
times, the example of Bolivia\'s Sanchez Losada.  Mejia wants 
to deliver on his promises to the barrios and his list of 
small-scale uncompleted projects, both to do good and to do 
well in the elections. 
 
RECOMMENDATION 
 
16.  (C) Embassy recommends that the USG keep the pressure up 
on the GODR to continue needed economic and financial 
measures, including by withholding the bulk of the delayed 
IFI disbursements, but that the USG support a one-time 
lifeline in the form of the $100 million disbursement by the 
IDB for highly visible and widely spread social sector 
projects. Otherwise, given the increasingly turbulent 
situation, we run the risk, as is said here, of \"finding that 
when the hats are finally ready, there will be no heads to 
receive them.\" 
 
 
HERTELL 
"
"11784","10/30/2003 17:53","03SANTODOMINGO6138","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE301451","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006138 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CCA, WHA/CAR, IO/UNP AND USUN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, ETRD, DR 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED TO GODR ON US OPPOSITION TO 
CUBA\'S EMBARGO RESOLUTION 
 
REF: STATE 301451 
 
Poloff delivered reftel points to Ambassador Rhadis Polanco 
de Abreu, Sub-Director of the International Organizations 
office of the Dominican Foreign Ministry.  Ambassador Polanco 
de Abreu could not provide immediate comment on whether the 
Dominican Republic would vote against, or abstain from 
voting, on Cuba\'s resolution.  Post will report substantive 
comment in septel. 
HERTELL 
"
"11785","10/30/2003 18:20","03SANTODOMINGO6144","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE303844","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006144 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR, USUN, IO/PHO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, KPAL, DR 
SUBJECT: UNWRA RESOLUTION DEMARCHE DELIVERED TO GODR 
 
REF: STATE 303844 
 
 Poloff delivered reftel points to Ambassador Rhadis Polanco 
de Abreu, Sub-Director of the International Organizations 
office at the Dominican Foreign Ministry on October 30. 
Ambassador Polanco de Abreu did not provide substantive 
comment.  She indicated that she would pass the points on to 
the Foreign Minister and the Dominican permanent 
representative to the UN.  Any substantive comment will be 
reported in septel. 
HERTELL 
"
"11804","10/31/2003 14:32","03SANTODOMINGO6166","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SANTODOMINGO5946","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 006166 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), WHA/PPC (FALLS), G/TIP 
(LINDERMAN) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC ANTI-TIP ACTIVITIES SINCE 
PASSAGE OF NEW LAW 
 
REF: A. SANTO DOMINGO 5946 
 
     B. SANTO DOMINGO 4763 
     C. SANTO DOMINGO 4090 
 
SUMMARY 
--------- 
 
1. (U) Since passing a comprehensive law against trafficking 
in persons (TIP) and alien smuggling in August, the GODR has 
taken steps to prevent trafficking, protect victims and 
prosecute offenders.  New legislation provided impetus for 
action by government officials, civil society and 
international organizations.  Local press continues to 
spotlight trafficking-related stories, with special emphasis 
on the recently passed legislation and cases involving sexual 
exploitation of minors who might be trafficking victims.  The 
Secretariat of Foreign Relations, National Police, and other 
 
SIPDIS 
official entities are communicating better and exchanging 
information.  This increased cooperation recently led to the 
swift arrests of accused traffickers of Dominican girls to 
Haiti.  End Summary. 
 
GOVERNMENT MINISTRIES STEP UP TO THE PLATE 
------------------------------------------ 
 
2. (U) Since passing a comprehensive law against trafficking 
in persons (TIP) and alien smuggling in August of 2003, the 
GODR has taken steps to prevent trafficking, protect victims 
and prosecute offenders.  With leadership from the Director 
of Women\'s and Children\'s Issues, Ambassador Luisa \"Chiqui\" 
Vicioso, the Secretariat of Foreign Relations (MFA) has 
assumed a more active role in addressing TIP issues. 
Ambassador Vicioso\'s office organizes monthly meetings for a 
newly created \"Network to Combat Trafficking in Persons and 
Smuggling,\" the first of which were held in September and 
October.  The network includes the heads of the new 
specialized trafficking units at the National Police and the 
Attorney General\'s office and reps from the Migration 
Directorate, the secretariats of the Armed Forces, Tourism, 
Labor, and Women, the National Council for Children and 
Adolescents (CONANI), NGOs and international organizations. 
Network members share updates on their activities and 
suggestions for next steps.  During the October meeting, the 
MFA reported sharing a tip with the National Police anti-TIP 
unit on a suspected trafficker of Dominican girls to Haiti, 
who consequently was arrested less than 24 hours after the 
notification. 
 
3. (U) The Secretariat of Tourism is combatting TIP with 115 
inspectors who monitor the industry for human rights abuses. 
The secretariat has improved its collaboration with 
international contacts, especially in destination countries, 
to investigate trafficking rings that promote the Dominican 
Republic for sex tourism.  This collaboration led to the 
recent discovery of at least three Internet trafficking rings 
that advertise small hotels in Sosua, a popular tourist beach 
town on the north coast.  Prosecution of such crimes is 
difficult, because they typically involve foreigners 
organizing activities on the Internet from overseas to be 
carried out by local accomplices.  The Tourism Secretariat 
also works closely with the National Hotel and Restaurants 
Association (ASONAHORES) to train hotel/resort staffs about 
trafficking and penalties.  The secretariat also works with 
the International Labor Organization (ILO) on its recently 
launched program against commercial sexual exploitation in 
Boca Chica and Puerto Plata (see ref B). 
 
NATIONAL POLICE ANTI-TIP UNIT IN PURSUIT 
---------------------------------------- 
 
4. (U) The anti-TIP unit at the National Police was 
officially inaugurated August 20, with the announcement that 
Major Ramon Hernandez Peralta would be in charge of the unit. 
 (Note: Post previously reported that Col. Jose Polanco would 
be in charge.  Col. Polanco is actually in charge of the 
National Police Couterfeit Investigations Department, in the 
same building where the anti-TIP unit is physically located. 
Major Hernandez Peralta reports to Col. Polanco.  End Note.) 
Since official operations began, the Police anti-TIP unit has 
arrested at least 10 alleged alien smugglers (including a 
clergyman) and five alleged traffickers.  The unit has a 
staff of 13.  Currently, Counterfeit Investigations 
Departments countrywide send trafficking cases to the 
anti-TIP unit headquartered in Santo Domingo.  There are 
plans to establish anti-TIP units in as many provinces as 
possible.  Major Hernandez has established credibility within 
a relatively short period; he has responded quickly to tips 
provided by emboffs and the Foreign Secretariat.  The unit 
also sends monthly activity reports to the Embassy, an effort 
that is welcomed. 
 
ATTORNEY GENERAL\'S ANTI-TIP UNIT WORKING HARD 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
5. (SBU) The anti-TIP unit at the Attorney General\'s office 
is also hard at work.  Within the anti-TIP unit there is a 
specialized office to handle trafficked minors who are 
victims of commercial sexual exploitation. This office is 
staffed with 3 lawyers, 3 members of the Armed Forces and one 
member from the National Prosecutor\'s office.  Crisalida 
Diaz, head of the commercial sexual exploitation office, told 
Poloff that although the general public is not aware the 
office exists, at least eight trafficking cases have been 
received and are under investigation.  There also seems to be 
a difference of opinion regarding which law will be used to 
prosecute traffickers such as Guillermo Radhames \"Ramos\" 
Garcia (see ref A).  According to Diaz, infractions that 
occurred prior to August 7 (when the anti-TIP law was signed 
by President Mejia) will be adjudicated based on pre-existing 
law.  In an earlier separate meeting with poloffs, the 
Attorney General implied that the new law would be applied to 
the Garcia case.  However, Diaz added that in some high 
profile cases where the crime warrants stricter penalties, 
the Supreme Court could intervene to apply the new law. 
 
 
AND CIVIL SOCIETY IS ALSO INVOLVED... 
------------------------------------- 
 
6. (U) With assistance from USAID, local NGO Institutionalism 
and Justice Foundation (FINJUS) held seminars about the new 
anti-TIP law in October.  The press widely covered these 
seminars, and in one instance included a lengthy interview 
with IOM Chief Juan Artola, who warned that the Dominican 
Republic could face Tier 3 sanctions from the United States 
next year if the GODR does not use the new law to prosecute 
public officials involved in trafficking.  The press has also 
provided detailed coverage of developments regarding the case 
of Congressman Guillermo Radhames \"Ramos\" Garcia, who is free 
but scheduled for trial for alien smuggling charges. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
7. (SBU) The GODR is addressing trafficking problems.  Some 
public officials are clearly engaged, while others need more 
coaxing.  Bureaus within the MFA, for example, will need to 
communicate better to address potential internal corruption 
by Dominican consular officials abroad.  An ongoing challenge 
will be ensuring that key actors, including police officers, 
prosecutors and judges, are properly trained to implement and 
uphold the new law against trafficking and smuggling.  As the 
economy continues to plunge, however, more Dominicans are 
likely to be victimized by traffickers and smugglers offering 
lucrative \"job opportunities\" in foreign countries. 
HERTELL 
"
"11809","10/31/2003 15:36","03SANTODOMINGO6168","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006168 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, OFDP, ETRD, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ANNOUNCEMENT OF NEW DIPLOMATIC POSTINGS 
TO THE U.S., HOLY SEE 
 
 
 1.  (U)  President Mejia signed several executive orders on 
October 30, appointing new diplomats to various posts. 
Changes in Dominican posts in the U.S. are as follows: 
 
a.  Virginia Esposito is the new Deputy Chief of Mission at 
the Dominican Embassy, replacing Luis Alvarez Rivera 
(resigned); 
 
b.  William Soto Media is the new consul general in the 
Dominican consulate in Chicago, replacing Danilo Gonzalez 
Borrel; 
 
c.  General Luis Mariano Rodriguez Martinez is the new 
Defense Attach for the Dominican Mission to the United 
Nations in New York. 
 
Note: Alvarez Rivera is the son of Luis Alvarez Renta, a 
Dominican-American businessman who is under investigation in 
the Banco Intercontinental scandal.  End Note. 
 
2.  Mejia also named Carlos Conrado Marion Landais as the 
Dominican Republic\'s new ambassador to the Vatican and 
Rolando Galvan Espino as the Undersecretary of State for 
Foreign Affairs for Economic and Trade Negotiation issues. 
HERTELL 
"
"11815","10/31/2003 17:39","03SANTODOMINGO6178","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE295195","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006178 
 
SIPDIS 
 
ATTENTION: ECONOMICS DIVISION DIRECTOR, LISA FOX 
 
 
E.O 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, ECON, AFSI, AFSN 
SUBJECT: REQUEST FOR REGISTRATION: MAY 2004 (PE-222) TRADE 
AGREEMENT MONITORING AND IMPLEMENTATION COURSE 
 
REF:  A) SECSTATE 295195 
 
SANTO DOMINGO IS PLEASED TO NOMINATE THE FOLLOWING FSN EMPLOYEE 
TO PARTICIPATE IN THE ECONOMIC LES/FSNS INVITED TO ATTEND MAY 
2004 (PE-222) TRADE AGREEMENT MONITORING AND IMPLEMENTATION 
COURSE, SCHEDULED FOR MAY 3-7, 2004 IN THE NFATC CAMPUS IN 
ARLINGTON. 
 
1-A) NAME AND GRADE OF LES/FSN NOMINEE: ABREU, BOLIVAR, FSN-07 
B) DATE OF BIRTH:05/29/72 
C) NATIONALITY: DOMINICAN 
D) PASSPORT NUMBER: 2102327 
E) AGENCY: PROGRAM 
F) POSITION TITLE: ECONOMIC/POLITICAL ASSISTANT 
G) AMERICAN SUPERVISOR\'S NAME AND E-MAIL ADDRESS: MICHAEL MEIGS, 
MEIGSMA@STATE.GOV 
H) EDUCATION, JOB EXPERIENCE AND CURRENT RESPONSIBILITIES: 
EDUCATION:  UNIVERSITY DEGREE IN HOTEL MANAGEMENT.  POST GRADUATE 
IN ECONOMICS AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS.  MASTER\'S DEGREE IN 
DIPLOMACY AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS, SUMMA CUM LAUDE.  COMPUTER 
COURSES, TRADE AGREEMENT MONITORING AND IMPLEMENTATION COURSE, 
ECONOMICS COURSE AND POLITICAL TRAINING FOR FOREIGN SERVICE 
NATIONALS. 
EXPERIENCE:  GROUPS AND CONVENTION COORDINATOR - CASA DE CAMPO 
RESORT.  1996-1997. 
ECO/POL ASSISTANT - AMERICAN EMBASSY.  1997 TO PRESENT. 
I) DESCRIPTION OF HOW COURSE WOULD ENHANCE NOMINEE\'S PRODUCTIVITY 
AT POST: AS ASSISTANT AND ANALYST FOR ECOPOL SECTION, MR. ABREU 
IS RESPONSIBLE FOR MONTHLY SECTORAL ANALYSIS.  THE DOMINICAN 
REPUBLIC IS CURRENTLY NEGOTIATION A BILATERAL FREE TRADE 
AGREEMENT WITH THE UNITED STATES, WITH THE PROSPECT OF 
ASSOCIATING WITH THE U.S. CENTRAL AMERICA FTA.  THE DOMINICAN 
REPUBLIC HAS BEEN ALLIED WITH THE U.S. ON WTO ISSUES IN GENEVA 
AND AT CANCUM.  THE COUNTRY IS LIKELY TO FACE DIFFICULTIES IN 
TRIPS COMPLIANCE, SERVICES, AND GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT. HERTELL 
"
"11819","10/31/2003 19:33","03SANTODOMINGO6195","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE293941","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006195 
 
SIPDIS 
 
ATTENTION: WHA/EX MARY MCBRIDE 
 
 
E.O 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT, APER 
SUBJECT: WHA 2004 SUMMER INTERN PROGRAM 
 
REF:  A) SECSTATE 293941 
 
SANTO DOMINGO IS INTERESTING IN PARTICIPATING IN THE WHA 2004 
SUMMER INTERN PROGRAM.  THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION AS PER REFTEL: 
 
1-NUMBER OF INTERNS REQUESTED: TWO INTERNS 
2-LANGUAGE REQUIREMENT: SPANISH MIN 2+ 2+ 
3-WHAT SECTION WILL THE INTERN WORK: ECOPOL AND HR/MANAGEMENT 
4-WHO WILL SUPERVISE THE INTERN: MICHAEL MEIGS, ECOPOL COUNSELOR 
(809) 731-4335, ROLAND G.ESTRADA, MANAGEMENT COUNSELOR (809) 731- 
4255. 
5-SPECIFIC DUTIES, PROJECTS INTERN WILL PERFORM: A) THE ECOPOL 
INTERN WILL COVER DUTIES NORMALLY ASSIGNED TO A SECOND TOUR 
OFFICER, INCLUDING POLITICAL AND/OR ECONOMIC SPOT REPORTING. B) 
THE HR/MANAGEMENT INTERN PERFORMS SPECIAL PROJECTS AND WILL 
ASSIST IN THE RETAIL PRICE (COLA) SURVEY. 
6- HOUSING: WLL BE PROVIDED. SINCE POST HOUSING IS CURRENTLY IN 
SHORT SUPPLY, IT MAY BE REQUIRED FOR INTERNS TO SHARE A TEMPORARY 
LEASED APARTMENT WALKING DISTANCE FROM EMBASSY. 
7- VISA REQUIREMENTS: THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC REQUIRES A VISA TO 
ENTER THE COUNTRY AND IT IS HIGHLY ENCOURAGE YOU TO OBTAIN VISAS 
BEFORE ARRIVAL. IF FOR SOME REASON YOU ARE UNABLE TO OBTAIN A 
VISA PRIOR TO TRAVEL, A TOURIST VISA CAN BE PURCHASED AT THE 
AIRPORT IN SANTO DOMINGO. THE COST IS USD 10. 
8-INNOCULATIONS REQUIRED: NONE (RECOMMENDED HEPATITS A AND B) 
9-DEPOSITS REQUIRED:POST ENCOURAGES A DEPOSIT OF US$300 FOR 
MISCELLANEOUS EXPENSES. 
10-SECURITY CLEARANCES: SECRET 
HERTELL 
"
"11820","10/31/2003 21:24","03SANTODOMINGO6202","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE305781","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006202 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR IO/SHA (BRACKEN) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR 
SUBJECT: PEDOPHILIA CERTIFICATION FOLLOW-UP 
 
REF: A. STATE 305781 
 
     B. STATE 256553 
 
1.  Embassy Santo Domingo responded to initial request 
(reftel B) via Santo Domingo 5020 dated September 17. 2003. 
We will forward e-copy of our cable to Joseph Bracken via 
email. 
HERTELL 
"
"11904","11/5/2003 11:17","03SANTODOMINGO6302","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","03WARSAW3803","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 006302 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), PM (LIKENS); SECDEF FOR 
OSD; NSC FOR SHANNON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/04/2013 
TAGS: MARR, MOPS, MCAP, PREL, PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT MEJIA PROMISES DOMINICAN TROOPS WILL 
STAY IN IRAQ 
 
REF: A) WARSAW 03803 B) DERHAM-KUBISKE TELCON 11/4/03 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske, reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary.  President Mejia told the Ambassador of his 
deep concern for Dominican soldiers at risk in Iraq. After 
closely listening to the Ambassador\'s emphatic presentation 
on the need for continuing Dominican engagement, Mejia said 
that the Dominican battalion Iraq will remain in place as 
planned.  He will host the Ambassador, DATT, MAAG chief and 
emboffs for in-depth discussions with the senior military on 
Friday, November 7.  End summary. 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
2.  (C)  The battalion of 302 Dominican soldiers serving with 
coalition forces arrived in Iraq in August 2003 and is 
scheduled to rotate out on February 15, to be replaced by 
another battalion for an additional six months.  Dominican 
officers visiting Warsaw announced the intention to withdraw 
Dominican troops (reftel). 
 
3. (C)  Secretary of the Armed Forces Soto Jimenez told MAAG 
chief today that Mejia had decided two weeks earlier to 
repatriate the troops \"as soon as possible.\"  He and his 
staff indicated that they had met with the President in the 
morning and had obtained his assent to leaving behind a 
contingent of liaison officers and a platoon of military 
police.  The issue, they said, was primarily pay; they said 
that Mejia had been expecting the United States to cover 
salary and allowances for the batallion, a cost for the full 
year of almost USD 1 million.  The Dominican officers also 
complained that supplies were inadequate, particularly 
including parkas, boots, and transportation. 
 
4. (C) Under Dominican law, the GODR is required to pay an 
overseas allowance to troops serving outside the Dominican 
Republic.  The current financial situation in the Dominican 
Republic has left the Military foraging for funds and unable 
to meet its legal obligations.  To date, two allowance 
payments have been made to the individual soldiers.  The 
first, approximately USD 250, was made when the soldiers 
departed the Dominican Republic in August (funded through a 
loan from a local firm regularly doing business with the 
military).  The second, approximately USD 200, was made in 
mid-October when Soto Jimenez, visited his troops in Iraq. 
The Secretary and accompanying officers funded their own 
travel. 
 
MEJIA LISTENS 
 
5. (C)Despite a busy schedule, President Mejia agreed to 
receive the Ambassador and and emboffs on short notice, 
giving us priority over other waiting visitors. The 
Ambassador emphasized to the President the extent of USG 
support for the Dominican Republic, noting his own recent 
contacts with the Department, Treasury, and the White House, 
all of whom want to help the Dominican Republic.  He stressed 
that the President had to reconsider his decision to bring 
Dominican troops back early from Iraq.  There would be strong 
consequences if Mejia were to reconsider his pledge to 
support coalition rebuilding of Iraq.  The Dominican presence 
is important to the United States and to the rest of the 
coalition; it is the nation\'s clear rejection of terrorism 
and a sign of support for liberty. 
 
6.  (C)  Mejia said he worried that something might happen to 
the troops.  The situation was volatile and unpredictable. 
The killing of even a single Dominican would be disastrous, 
socially and politically.  The opponents in Iraq were \"crazy\" 
and targeted those trying to help the country.  They were ill 
in spirit, like the Taliban, and thought nothing of sending 
suicide bombers against civilian targets. 
 
7. (C)  The Ambassador stressed the historic nature of the 
mission and the prestige that the Dominicans\' extraordinary 
work was bringing to them.  He appealed to the President\'s 
duty and leadership. The word of a possible withdrawal had 
brought immediate, strong reaction from high levels in 
Washington. 
 
8. (C) After a pause, Mejia replied, \"They will stay.\" His 
expression was serious.  \"But think of their families. . . .\" 
and then, \"but we must assume our responsibilities.\" He 
repeated the need to assume the DR\'s global responsibilities. 
 Mejia said he would so instruct the military, citing the 
Ambassador, and then he decided to invite the Ambassador and 
four staff to a working lunch with the armed forces on 
Friday, November 7. 
 
9.  (C)  Mejia wound up with some acerbic remarks about the 
international financial institutions (\"economists working in 
air conditioned offices have no understanding of the real 
conditions here\"), expressed his dismay at the deterioration 
of the exchange rate (now 40 pesos to the dollar), and said 
he was very satisfied at the seizure of nearly a ton of 
cocaine aboard a ship from Colombia (\"destroy it, I told 
them, get rid of it\"). 
 
10.  (C) Comment.  We note that the Dominnican military 
read-out appears to have been misleading.  If one takes him 
at his word -- and in this instance we do -- Mejia\'s concern 
is for the exposure of the troops, and certainly for the 
political consequences if any are killed or wounded.  Even 
so, financing for their operations is unsecured and of 
fundamental concern to the Dominican military.  When the 
Ambassador brought the argument back to the fundamental 
principles -- the standing of the country within the 
international community and its solidarity with the war 
against terrorism -- Mejia did the right thing. 
HERTELL 
"
"11915","11/5/2003 14:04","03SANTODOMINGO6327","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE297777|03STATE301451","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 006327 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), WHA/CCA, IO/UNP, USUN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/05/2013 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PHUM, ETRD, CU, DR 
SUBJECT: GODR ON CUBA AT THE UNGA AND THE IBERO-AMERICAN 
SUMMIT 
 
REF: A. STATE 297777 B. STATE 301451 
 
Classified By: EcoPol Counselor Michael Meigs, reasons 1.5 (b,d). 
 
1.(C)  Summary.  The Dominican Republic will not vote against 
or abstain in Cuba\'s UNGA resolution on the U.S. embargo. 
However, the Dominicans will support a separate resolution 
against human rights abuses in Cuba at the Ibero-American 
Summit.  End Summary. 
 
 2. (U) Poloffs delivered reftel B talking points to 
Ambassador Rhadys Abreu de Polanco, Deputy Director of the 
International Organizations desk at the Dominican Foreign 
Ministry, on November 3.  Reftel A talking points were 
delivered on October 30.  Ambassador Abreu told us that the 
Dominican Republic would not vote against or abstain on the 
Cuban resolution on ending the U.S. embargo against Cuba 
which will be presented in the UNGA.  The GODR voted for 
Cuba\'s resolution last year, and the Dominican UN permrep has 
already been instructed to do so again this year.  Ambassador 
Abreu listened politely to arguments on why the Dominican 
Republic should abstain from voting for the resolution, but 
remained unswayed.  She told us that the Foreign Ministry did 
not receive our request far enough in advance to change the 
instructions to the Dominican permrep. 
 
3. (C)  Ambassador Abreu was considerably more positive on 
the possibility of supporting a resolution condemning Cuba\'s 
human rights record at the upcoming Ibero-American Summit. 
She told us that the Ibero-American Summit was the correct 
forum to raise the issue of the \"events\" that took place in 
March in Cuba.  She indicated that other countries felt the 
same way and thought that a resolution could be successfully 
introduced and adopted at the summit. 
 
4. (U)  Ambassador Abreu raised the subject of official 
representation at international organization summits, 
assemblies and conferences.  She told us that the current 
Foreign Minister approves all representatives from the GODR 
and that he often waits until the last minute to decide who 
will attend or to change the list of attendees.  For example, 
the GODR expected to send its Deputy Foreign Minister and 
International Organizations Director to the OAS Special 
Security Conference in Mexico.  On the day they were to 
depart, the Foreign Minister decided that he would attend 
himself and no other ministry personnel would accompany him. 
Ambassador Abreu said she would inform the Foreign Minister 
that for planning purposes the USG prefers to have a list of 
attendees as far in advance as possible. 
 
5. (C)  COMMENT:  It appears that the GODR is under regional 
pressure to vote with Cuba on its UNGA resolution. 
Ambassador Abreu\'s comment that the USG\'s request to vote 
against the resolution or abstain from voting was tardy, is 
not an indication that the GODR would have voted any 
differently even if asked to do so months in advance.  The 
GODR is unlikely to introduce a resolution condemning Cuba at 
the Ibero-American Summit, but can be expected to vote for 
such a resolution if one is introduced. 
HERTELL 
"
"11962","11/6/2003 22:09","03SANTODOMINGO6408","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03REFTEL:SECSTATE299546","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006408 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIS, ETTC, SENV 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE ON NOTIFICATION OF NEW TEDS REGULATIONS 
DELIVERED 
 
REF: REFTEL: SECSTATE 299546 
 
1.  On November 5, Embassy Santo Domingo delivered demarche 
by facsimile on notification of new Turtle Excluder Device 
(TEDs) regulations to Cecilio Diaz Carela, head of the 
Department for Marine and Coastal Policy, Dominican Ministry 
of Environment.  Embassy will report any response from 
Dominican authorities. 
HERTELL 
"
"11971","11/7/2003 11:03","03SANTODOMINGO6409","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006409 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), PASS TO FAA WASHINGTON; 
PASS TO USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BTIO, EAIR, EIND, ETRD, DR 
SUBJECT: REQUEST FOR FAA TO ACCELERATE LEGAL REVIEW OF 
DOMINICAN CIVIL AVIATION LAW \"DRAFT\" 
 
1.  SUMMARY.  During the November 4 U.S.-Dominican Trade and 
Investment Council meeting in Washington, D.C., Dominican 
Ambassador to the U.S. Hugo Guilliani raised the topic of his 
country\'s current ICAO Category II status.  The FAA is 
currently reviewing the Dominican Civil Aviation Law \"draft\", 
delivered in mid-August.  Because of its high sensitivity and 
because intensive bilateral trade talks are scheduled for 
January-March 2004, Embassy requests that the FAA complete 
its analysis as quickly as possible.  END SUMMARY. 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
2.  The Dominican Republic is currently classified a Category 
II country, pursuant to determination by the Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) that the country does not provide 
adequate safety oversight of its air carrier operations in 
accordance with the standards set forth by the International 
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).  Without Category I 
status Dominican air carriers, unless using wet-leases from 
authorized U.S. or foreign carriers, cannot fly into United 
States air space. 
 
3.  Earlier this year the Dominican Republic requested a 
Technical Review of the country by the FAA as part of its 
efforts to comply with ICAO standards.  In a July 
consultation in Washington, which Ambassador Guilliani 
attended, the FAA requested for review an English version of 
the Dominican Civil Aviation Law draft and its most recent 
Action Plan.  Since mid-August FAA Washington has been in 
possession of the law draft while the Miami field office has 
had the Action Plan. 
 
4.  FAA officials commented to Embassy that enactment of a 
civil aviation law in compliance with ICAO standards is an 
absolute requisite for achieving Category I status. 
 
Aviation flies into Trade Talks 
 
5.  On November 4, during the last day of bilateral trade 
consultations at USTR, Dominican Ambassador to the U.S. 
Guilliani raised the topic of his country\'s current Category 
II status and described it as a trade barrier. The U.S. side 
noted his concern but indicated that the venue was not 
appropriate for these discussions. 
 
6.  Given the harmonious bilateral cooperation to date on 
trade issues and the very high profile of the upcoming 
intensive negotiations on a bilateral Free Trade Agreement, 
Embassy believes it is in the U.S. interest to address 
aviation concerns expeditiously. The Dominican Civil Aviation 
Authority delivered the requested documents in August and is 
looking forward to FAA comments.  Officials are eager to 
receive comments for use in shaping draft legislation and 
they want to coordinate an FAA Technical Review. 
 
7.  ACTION REQUEST.  Embassy asks that FAA accelerate as much 
as possible its examination of the Dominican submissions and 
seek to identify appropriate dates for further technical 
consultation. 
HERTELL 
"
"11980","11/7/2003 15:08","03SANTODOMINGO6424","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","02STATE97980","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006424 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), L/LEI (W FUENTES, GUILANI 
AND SULLIVAN) 
JUSTICE FRO CRIM/OIA J. MAZUREK AND R. GOLDMAN 
US MARSHAL SERVICE PLEASE PASS TO C. DUDLEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CJAN, KCRM, KFRD, PINR, SNAR, DR 
SUBJECT: GODR EXTRADITES TWO FUGITIVES (TEJADA, RODOLFO AND 
ESTEVEZ, FRANCISCO JOSE) 
 
REF: A. 02 STATE 097980 
 
     B. 01 STATE 187181 
 
1.  On November 4, 2003, Rodolfo Tejada and Francisco Jose 
Estevez were extradited from the Dominican Republic in the 
company of US Marshals.  Tejada is wanted to stand trial on 
federal narcotics charges.  Upon arrival on a flight from 
Santo Domingo to Miami International Airport, U.S. Department 
of Homeland Security Officials (then Customs) searched 
Tejada\'s bag and found 5,700 MDMA tablets hidden in two 
compact disc portfolios.  Mr. Tejada was arrested, failed to 
appear at trial and fled to the Dominican Republic. 
Francisco Jose Estevez pleaded guilty to federal narcotics 
charges on July 19, 2001, in the Eastern District of New 
York.  He violated the terms of his bail by traveling to the 
Dominican Republic.  The Dominican Republic\'s National Drug 
Control Directorate (DNCD), working with US Marshals and DEA, 
arrested Tejada in April 2003, and Estevez in June 2003. 
 
2.  These are the seventh and eighth extraditions by the 
Dominican Republic in 2003, and the forty-second and 
forty-third under the administration of President Hipolito 
Mejia. 
HERTELL 
"
"11981","11/7/2003 15:08","03SANTODOMINGO6426","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE305553","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006426 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, KPAL, OPDC 
SUBJECT: U.S. MIDEAST UNGA STRATEGY LETTER AND DEMARCHE 
DELIVERED TO GODR 
 
REF: A. STATE 305553 
 
     B. STATE 306875 
 
 Poloff delivered reftel A talking points to Ambassador 
Rhadys Abreu de Polanco Deputy Director of International 
Organizations Desk in the Dominican Foreign Ministry, on 
November 3.  Secretary Powell\'s letter (reftel B) to Foreign 
Minister Guerrero Prats was delivered on November 4. 
Ambassador Abreu commented that the situation in the Middle 
East continues to be a difficult one and the GODR will back 
the USG to the extent possible.  She could not commit to a 
\"no\" vote or an abstention on a resolution establishing the 
\"Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices,\" but 
promised to pass our request to the Foreign Minister and the 
Dominican permrep to the UN. 
HERTELL 
"
"11986","11/7/2003 19:07","03SANTODOMINGO6442","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03STATE230096","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 006442 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) AND WHA/PPC (NORMAN) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, ECON, KCRM, SNAR, AMGT, DR 
SUBJECT: 90-DAY GOALS MET IN 90 DAYS - SANTO DOMINGO 
 
REF: A. STATE 230096 
 
     B. SANTO DOMINGO 04246 
     C. STATE 304789 
     D. SANTO DOMINGO 06379 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary.  Embassy Santo Domingo has met all three 
of its 90-day goals set forth in reftel B.  Emboffs have: a.) 
Increased the Dominican\'s readiness for CAFTA docking talks, 
b.) Secured GODR agreement for international election 
observers and identified potential observers, and c.) 
Convinced the GODR to take action against 
smugglers/traffickers or corrupt officials.  Embassy Santo 
Domingo will continue to work with GODR to make further 
progress in each of these areas. 
 
-------------------- 
CAFTA docking talks 
-------------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) Emboffs worked with Dominican counterparts on two 
major areas relating to the upcoming CAFTA docking talks: a.) 
strengthening copyright regulations, and b.) identifying 
concerns and priorities as the Dominicans enter negotiations. 
 The GODR had issued a resolution that weakened enforcement 
provisions in copyright cases and conflicted with current 
Dominican piracy laws.  In late August, the GODR reversed the 
decision via a second resolution passed by the Secretariat of 
Culture, resulting in an overall strengthening of the 
administration of copyright laws in the country.  Emboffs 
also engaged on a frequent and regular basis with GODR 
officials on the CAFTA integration process and content to 
identify priorities and concerns.  The GODR has established 
its negotiating team and has launched its outreach process 
with Dominican interested parties to identify their key 
concerns. 
 
3.  (SBU) Additional steps taken to increase GODR readiness 
for CAFTA docking talks include: USAID support in sponsoring 
upcoming training in rules of origin and international 
arbitration, and outreach to civil society and the private 
sector.  Training courses in international arbitration and 
rules of origin are scheduled to take place in November. 
Outreach to the private sector is an ongoing process. 
Emboffs are approaching all major chambers of commerce and on 
October 22, the DCM delivered a comprehensive speech on trade 
policy to an association of chambers in Santiago, the 
Dominican Republic\'s second largest city. 
 
---------------------------------- 
International Election Observers 
---------------------------------- 
 
4.  (SBU) Emboffs met with various members of the Central 
Electoral Board (JCE), the GODR board which has the authority 
to ask for international election observers.  The JCE 
participated in a UNDP round-table with the EU and several 
donor countries, including the USG, and said that it would 
enthusiastically welcome international observers for the May 
2004, presidential elections.  The UNDP will sponsor a second 
round-table to discuss details and logistics.  Emboffs have 
confirmed that the NDI/Carter Center, the International 
Foundation for Election Systems (IFES) and the Centro de 
Asesoria y Promocion Electoral (CAPEL) are interested in 
serving as observers to the election if resources are 
available.  The Carter Center and IFES have proposed 
USG-funded missions, and the OAS is expected to submit a 
proposal as well.  Embassy Santo Domingo does not/not have 
resources to fund any of these proposals at this time. 
Embassy sent request for USG funding (reftel D). 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
GODR\'s action against smugglers or corrupt officials 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
5.  (SBU) The Ambassador and Emboffs have repeatedly urged 
the GODR to prosecute suspected alien smuggler and Dominican 
Congressman Guillermo Radhames Ramos Garcia.  The Ambassador 
discussed the case directly with President Mejia.  The DCM 
and Poloffs met with the Dominican Attorney General, the 
Chief of the Supreme Court, and the chief of the National 
Police, in October, in addition to raising the issue with 
lower level contacts throughout the past 90 days.  Ramos 
Garcia was apprehended attempting to bring East Asian 
migrants illegally into the Dominican Republic from Haiti. 
With much prodding from Embassy Santo Domingo, the Dominican 
Attorney General\'s office turned over to the Dominican 
Supreme Court the documents necessary for prosecution.  The 
Supreme Court has original jurisdiction over the case due to 
Ramos Garcia\'s position as a congressman.  The Supreme Court 
held two hearings on preliminary matters on October 22, and 
October 30.  Ramos Garcia\'s trial is currently scheduled to 
begin on December 4. 
 
6.  (SBU) Additionally, the Ambassador, DCM, Consul General 
and other Emboffs provided to the Foreign Minister the names 
of a former Dominican vice consul in Panama, and a Panamanian 
consul in Santo Domingo, who have been implicated in 
trafficking Dominican women to Panama.  Emboffs have also 
requested the National Police and the Dominican Under 
Secretary of Foreign Relations for Consular Affairs to open 
 
SIPDIS 
an investigation against the Dominican consular officer. 
HERTELL 
"
"12063","11/13/2003 1:29","03SANTODOMINGO6486","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 006486 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
USDOL FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/12/2013 
TAGS: DR, ELAB, PINS, PGOV 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: SUCCESSFUL NATIONAL WORK 
STOPPAGE 
 
 
Classified By: Charge Lisa Kubiske for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  A national work stoppage November 11, 
successfully organized by leftist groups and a few unions to 
protest deteriorating economic conditions and the 
government\'s economic policies, attracted wide participation 
and shut down businesses across the country.  Although most 
cities remained very quiet, scattered confrontations left 
eight persons dead and some 34 injured.  Some of the deaths 
resulted from police gunfire, but the casualties were 
relatively low in comparison with similar protests in the 
past.  President Mejia, senior military officers, and 
political party leaders expressed sympathy with the public\'s 
frustration, supported their right to peaceful protest, and 
strongly discouraged violence.  Security forces arrested at 
least 544 persons, many of whom were to be charged with 
disturbing the peace but were expected to be released shortly 
in accordance with law.  It is unlikely the organizers will 
win fulfillment of their unrealistic demands.  It is too 
early to know whether the event will influence the 
government\'s policies or the presidential election campaign 
in any way.  End summary. 
 
2. (U) A national work stoppage, or \"general strike,\" took 
place across the Dominican Republic from 6:00 a.m. local 
November 11 to 6:00 a.m. local November 12.  Led by a 
\"Nacional Coordinator for Unity and Struggle\" (Coordinadora 
Nacional para la Unidad y Lucha), participating or supporting 
organizations ranged from the Armed Front for Popular 
Struggle (FALPO, whose leader was arrested in Colombia for 
links with terrorists there) to the mainstream National 
Council of Labor Unity (Consejo Nacional de Unidad Sindical - 
CNUS).  However, leaders of other mainstream labor groups, 
including the largest transport workers union, refused to 
support the stoppage. 
 
3. (U) The protest was designed to show public frustration 
with rapidly rising living costs and widespread electric 
power outages in recent months.  The organizers called on the 
GODR to raise the minimum wage, double salaries, restrain 
prices, and restore electricity within 30 days.  The leaders 
also called for a debt moratorium and an end to the IMF 
program.  In light of the widespread participation, they 
termed the strike \"successful.\" 
 
4. (C) Youths from some poorer neighborhoods burned tires and 
threw trash on roads to slow traffic, but in many cases 
traffic passed without incident.  According to the National 
Police general in charge of investigations, police reacted 
violently only when surrounded or cornered by demonstrators 
who were throwing rocks and bottles or shooting.  Police and 
army troops were deployed mainly in areas that had been prone 
to violence during past protests and by vulnerable public 
facilities such as bridges and banks.  The scattered violent 
incidents, according to the National Police, left eight 
persons dead (including one policeman) and 34 wounded 
(including seven security force personnel).  The armed forces 
chief, in comments to us, attributed five of the deaths to 
police gunfire -- the police gave us a lower figure -- and 
one to FALPO extremists.  He noted that army troops 
performing police duties operated under strict rules of 
engagement.  Three deaths occurred in greater Santo Domingo 
and the rest in interior towns. 
 
5. (U) Before and during the stoppage, the President, 
political party leaders, and senior military officers 
expressed sympathy with the public\'s frustration over serious 
economic problems, acknowledged the right to protest 
peacefully, and strongly encouraged non-violence.  At the 
same time, in an effort to prevent violence, the GODR 
announced deployment of all available police and army troops, 
especially in and around the capital city.  The authorities 
emphasized that they were prepared for any contingency. 
Before and during the strike, security forces searched 
vehicles and their occupants for weapons.  They arrested at 
least 544 persons, many of whom were to be charged with 
disturbing the peace and were expected to be released within 
48 hours in accordance with law.  Several protest organizers, 
arrested prior to the strike, were subsequently released 
without being charged. 
6. (C) Late on November 11, authorities noticed that some 
usually troublesome neighborhoods in the capital were quiet, 
apparently because they had electric power.  Consequently, 
the government switched power distribution from affluent 
neighborhoods in the capital to other low-income areas in an 
effort to avert disturbances there.  Note: Electricity supply 
has fallen sharply below demand in recent weeks.  Much of the 
distribution is in government hands following the GODR\'s 
agreement with Union Fenosa.  End note. 
 
7. (U) The day after the strike, legislators disagreed on 
what should be done in response.  Chamber of Deputies 
president Alfredo Pacheco (of the ruling PRD) called on the 
GODR to immediately review its policies in light of the 
strike, while Senate president Jesus Vasquez (PRD) asked the 
public to give the authorities time to make necessary 
changes.  Secretary of Interior and Police Pedro Franco Badia 
said the government is disposed to have a dialog with the 
groups that organized the work stoppage, but noted that it 
would be impossible to double salaries for Dominican workers. 
 
8. (C) Comment:   President Mejia, who has often pointed to 
the \"three years of labor peace\" since he assumed office, has 
now had to cope with the first nationwide protest of his 
presidency.  His predecessor, Leonel Fernandez (1996-2000), 
faced more such disruptions.  Mejia gets kudos for upholding 
the human right of free speech and peaceable protests.  We 
are still looking into the situation on the arrests.  By 
historical standards, the violence this time was relatively 
limited and there have been few accusations that authorities 
used excessive force.  While there was plenty of cause for 
discontent (something Mejia himself noted) and plenty of 
sympathy throughout the country for a peaceful protest, the 
success of the work stoppage also reflects good planning on 
the part of the organizers.  They planned, and got, an event 
that called for support by essentially adding a fourth day to 
a long weekend without any requirement to march in the 
streets.   Government fulfillment of their demands within 30 
days, on the other hand, seems highly unlikely, both for the 
content (stabilizing the economy while raising all wages) and 
the timing (too close to Christmas).   It is too early to 
know whether the event will influence the government,s 
policies or the presidential election campaign in any way. 
End comment. 
KUBISKE 
"
"12085","11/13/2003 19:16","03SANTODOMINGO6538","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","03USUNNY2824","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 006538 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) AND IO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/13/2008 
TAGS: PREL, DR 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT MEJIA AND FOREIGN MINISTER RESPOND TO 
U.S. URGINGS ON ANTI-ISRAEL RESOLUTIONS IN UNGA 
 
REF: A. USUN NY 02824 
 
     B. STATE 312874 
     C. STATE 305553 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Charge delivered reftel B demarche to GODR Foreign 
Minister Francisco Guerrero Prats on November 12.  Ambassador 
Hertell placed a follow-up call to the Foreign Minister on 
November 13, to emphasize the importance of the UNGA votes. 
Guerrero Prats said that normally the Dominican Republic 
would vote with the Rio Group, in these cases against the US 
positions.  However, in regard to the two votes on the floor 
today, the Dominican PermRep had been instructed to abstain. 
The abstention would align the Dominican Republic with the 
Central American countries.  Guerrero Prats stated that he 
felt these abstentions should garner some good will from the 
USG. 
 
2. (C) Ambassador Hertell also spoke with President Hipolito 
Mejia on November 13, raising reftel B points.  President 
Mejia said he understood why the votes are important to the 
US and that he would immediately call one of his UN advisors 
regarding the matter.  NOTE:  The conversation between Mejia 
and the Ambassador took place after the scheduled start of 
22nd meeting of the UN Fourth Committee.  Therefore, even if 
Mejia decided to instruct the GODR PermRep to vote with the 
US, it is not clear that the new instructions could have been 
delivered to the PermRep in a timely manner.  End Note. 
HERTELL 
"
"12086","11/13/2003 19:53","03SANTODOMINGO6541","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03STATE311286","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006541 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EB/ESC/ESP, S/CT, INL/C, WHA, WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, EFIN, ETTC, PREL, KVPR, DR 
SUBJECT: TERRORIST FINANCING COORDINATION OFFICER: SANTO 
DOMINGO 
 
REF: STATE 311286 
 
1. (SBU) Embassy Santo Domingo Terrorist Financing 
Coordination Officer is DCM Lisa Kubiske.  She is available 
on Dept classified and unclassified e-mail; unclassified 
e-mail from outside the Department should be addressed to 
kubiskel@state.gov.  Direct telephone is (809) 731-4205. 
 
2. (SBU) Post\'s Terrorist Financing Action Officer is Thomas 
Pierce, Economic Officer, tel: (809) 731-4335.  He is 
available on the Department\'s classified and unclassified 
systems.  His unclassified email address is 
PierceTC@state.gov. 
HERTELL 
"
"12126","11/15/2003 20:34","03SANTODOMINGO6579","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 006579 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC-NOYES, DRL/PHD-DAVIS, WHA/CAR-MCISAAC, 
WHA/USOAS-IRVING; STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/RSD-HENDRIX; NSC 
FOR CRUZ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, EAID, PGOV 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC ELECTION LOGISTICS ON TRACK FOR 
MAY 2004 VOTE 
 
 
1. Summary:  Elections Director Gilberto Cruz Herasme, a top 
technical supervisor of the GODR\'s Central Election Board 
(JCE), has told us the JCE is \"90 percent\" on track with its 
published timetable of preparations for the May 16 
presidential election.  He flagged two problems: lack of 
agreement between the JCE and the political parties on the 
composition of 45 municipal election boards (out of 134), and 
recent opposition demands that the JCE\'s technical 
directors.resign.  On the latter issue, the JCE has received 
formal opinions from the two main oppposition parties, but is 
awaiting a reply from the government party before deciding 
whether to retain the directors.  Cruz Herasme emphasized 
that technical arrangements for the election would be \"better 
than ever,\" particularly the JCE\'s efforts to recruit 
qualified poll workers, train as many of them as possible, 
and tighten security.  These arrangements will also extend to 
poll sites overseas, including the United States, enabling 
expatriate Dominicans to vote for the first time.  End 
summary. 
 
Arrangements \"on track\" 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
2. Director of Elections Gilberto Cruz Herasme, a top 
technical supervisor at the GODR\'s Central Elections Board 
(JCE) who is responsible for logistics and security of the 
May 16 presidential election, discussed the status of 
preparations with poloff and USAID expert October 28.  Cruz 
Erasme, who had worked at JCE during the 1996 and 2000 
presidential elections and two legislative/municipal 
elections, assured us the board was \"90 percent\" on track 
with a previously published timetable. 
 
Political parties\' consent 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
3. Cruz Herasme voiced concern that appointees to 45 of the 
134 municipal election boards (juntas municipales 
electorales) had not yet gained approval by political party 
reps, a formal requirement.  The problems affected boards in 
the biggest cities, Santo Domingo and Santiago.  The JCE 
would need the political parties\' consent \"at every step\" of 
the process, he explained.  However, the process was as far 
along as it had been in 1995 for the 1996 election, which 
international observers had judged to be free and fair.  The 
chairman of the JCE\'s administrative chamber, Judge Nelson 
Arias, subsequently told the press that the current problems 
would be resolved by mid-November.  (Comment: This deadline 
may be unrealistic for some of the juntas.) 
 
Opposition demands 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
3. The election director\'s other current concern related to 
repeated demands by the main opposition parties (PRSC and 
PLD) that he and three other JCE technical directors resign 
because of perceived irregularities in the 2002 legislative 
and municipal elections.  He said it was increasingly 
difficult for him to work with the political party delegates 
to the election process as long as this issue remained 
unresolved, even though only one of the parties -- the PLD -- 
had included him in the list of officials to be removed.  The 
JCE had received written opinions on the matter from the two 
parties, but was waiting for the ruling PRD to deliver its 
views before making a decision whether to retain the 
directors.  (Note: Action by the JCE\'s nine judges was 
subsequently postponed until November 17.) 
 
Budget uncertainty 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
4. Asked whether the JCE would have an adequate budget for 
the election, given the GODR\'s severe economic problems, Cruz 
Herasme said that the GODR\'s budget request of RD $1.882 
billion (US $51 million) would suffice, but that its 
legislative approval was uncertain.  He cited press reports 
of a possible cut to RD $1.481 billion (US $40 million) and 
said JCE magistrates would lobby with lawmakers to win 
support for the original request.  (He noted that in similar 
fashion Congress had cut the budget for the 2000 election on 
orders from the late political strongman and former president 
Joaquin Balaguer.)  However, he said, the NGO \"Coalition for 
Transparency\" has offered training assistance to the JCE to 
supplement its official resources and that the offer would be 
included in the JCE\'s plans.   (Note: This NGO coalition 
includes the prominent USAID-funded NGO \"Participacion 
Ciudadana\" -- Citizen Participation.) 
 
Recruitment and training of workers 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
5. Cruz Herasme emphasized the JCE\'s efforts to recruit 
better qualified personnel as poll workers, political party 
delegates to the polls, and municipal board members.  The JCE 
expects to provide training through local universities for as 
many of the 62,500 polling site personnel as possible, and 
also to offer training to thousands of political party 
delegates. This had been a weak point in previous elections. 
He said starting in January the JCE would hold workshops for 
poll workers and political delegates, including a module on 
how to observe and detect electoral fraud.  For the first 
time, the JCE would evaluate poll workers\' performance and 
award prizes or extra compensation if merited. 
 
Security of polls 
- - - - - - - - - 
 
6. Security personnel to protect polling sites and election 
officials, drawn as usual from the National Police and armed 
forces, would also receive university-organized training, 
according to Cruz Herasme.  He said the JCE was adopting a 
new anti-fraud measure, which other countries had used 
successfully: sealing in transparent plastic the hand-written 
vote tally sheets (actas) from each polling table (colegio) 
to prevent their being altered en route to the municipal 
electoral board to be entered into the JCE computer system. 
 
Registration problems 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
7. Cruz Herasme referred to longstanding problems with 
voters\' identification cards and the fact that as many as 
half of the 3.2 million registered voters did not appear on 
the electoral roll at their assigned voting tables.  He said 
the registration deadline had been extended to January 16 and 
additional centers for identification card issuance would 
open in November, instead of early May as in previous 
elections..  In addition, the newly adopted system of \"open\" 
polling tables -- in which voters could come and go 
throughout election day -- would allow time for individual 
voters to resolve deficiencies of the electoral roll and i.d. 
cards. 
 
Absentee voting 
- - - - - - - - 
 
8. The logistical and security arrangements would also be 
extended for the first time to polling sites overseas, 
enabling expatriate Dominican citizens to participate. Cruz 
Herasme said the JCE would establish polling tables and local 
electoral boards in several cities in the U.S. (New York and 
Miami, in coordination with local authorities) and other 
countries with significant Dominican populations.  The would 
use trained personnel and security measures on a par with 
those at home.  He said the election officials would work at 
politically neutral sites such as hotels or clubs, rather 
than Dominican consulates. 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
9. Cruz Herasme, one of the JCE\'s top technical supervisors, 
impressed us with his professionalism, knowledge, and ongoing 
implementation of detailed plans to improve the logistics and 
security of the election process for 2004.  The technical 
aspects  of the election appear to be well in hand, provided 
the JCE takes the announced measures to facilitate 
registration and issuance of i.d. cards.  The continuing 
public skepticism of the JCE and its intentions is a legacy 
of the way in which the GODR pushed the current judges\' 
appointments through the PRD-dominated Congress last year. 
The transparency shown so far by the by the judges in the 
JCE\'s recently reorganized administrative chamber and a 
continued strong technical performance by Cruz Herasme and 
his colleagues should help build public confidence.  The 
JCE\'s main challenge will be political, not technical -- 
convincing the public that it will administer the election 
evenhandedly. 
 
10. We think it unlikely the JCE will yield to the opposition 
complaints and fire Cruz Herasme, who is generally well 
regarded for his work in past elections.  The JCE believes 
changing key personnel so close to the election would disrupt 
preparations.  However, we cannot rule out a decision to 
placate the critics by tossing out one of the JCE officials, 
perhaps the supervisor of the computing section, whom some 
have accused of irregularities in the 2002 election. 
Whether he stays or goes, the JCE has already approached the 
business community to assign some of its computer experts to 
help prepare for election day. 
HERTELL 
"
"12127","11/15/2003 20:34","03SANTODOMINGO6580","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SANTODOMINGO4990","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 006580 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), WHA/PPC (ROE) DRL/IL (WILSON) 
DOL JORGE PEREZ-LOPEZ, DOL CARLOS ROMERO 
STATE PASS USTR (CLATANOFF) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, ETRD, KCRM, PHUM, DR 
SUBJECT: CAFTA LABOR TEAM VISITS DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 4990 
 
1. (U) Summary.  On November 5-7 an inter-agency team 
discussed labor issues with the Dominican Republic in advance 
of free trade negotiations. In meetings with the Minister of 
Labor, leaders in Congress, civil society, employer 
federations and emboffs, team leader Assistant USTR Clatanoff 
stressed issues of freedom of association in free trade zones 
and trafficking in persons (specifically child prostitution 
and mistreatment of Haitian migrants).  Delegation members 
said the visit was useful and reassuring.  Labor unions and 
government reps told them a free trade agreement will 
mutually benefit partners and bolster respect for workers 
rights.  End Summary. 
 
CAFTA LABOR DELEGATION: FIRST VISIT TO DR 
 
2. (U) Assistant USTR for Labor Affairs William \"Bud\" 
Clatanoff led a USG inter-agency team to the Dominican 
Republic November 5-7 to review labor issues in preparation 
for negotiations on a free trade agreement.  Other members 
were Jorge Perez Lopez, Associate Deputy Under Secretary of 
Labor; Charlotte Roe, Senior Labor Advisor (WHA/PPC), Arlen 
Wilson, DRL/IL Deputy Director; and Carlos Romero, DOL 
economist. In preliminary comments to the Ambassador and 
emboffs, Clatanoff said that the text of the Dominican Labor 
Code appeared to be acceptable but the team needed to know 
more about standards of enforcement.  The different minimum 
wage structures in free trade zones and elsewhere in the 
country were a point of investigation (a concern was 
alleviated in later meetings -- see para 6). 
 
CONGRESS: GLAD TO BE OF SERVICE 
 
3. (U) House of Representatives Chairman Alfredo Pacheco and 
Senate President Jesus Vasquez said in separate meetings that 
they looked forward to close collaboration.  Pacheco did 
caution, however, that the free trade agreement would be 
finalized before any changes to the existing Labor Code 
(approved in 1992).  He said the country needed more time to 
fully implement it.  As for allegations of worker rights 
abuses in the free trade zones, Pacheco responded \"this is an 
old problem.\"  He pointed to the success story of the Leon 
Jimenez company, which in his opinion has paved the way in 
developing top-notch worker benefit programs. 
 
4. (U) Both congressional leaders commented that a free trade 
agreement will promote increased respect for workers\' rights. 
 Clatanoff stressed that the U.S. Congress is deeply 
concerned issues of trafficking in persons and child 
prostitution.  Pacheco cited the recent passage of a 
comprehensive law against trafficking in record time.  Both 
Pacheco and Vasquez spoke highly of Minister of Labor Milton 
Ray Guevarra, especially regarding the Ministry\'s efforts to 
eliminate the worst forms of child labor.  Vasquez commented 
that Ray Guevarra, having been a Senator, can appreciate the 
approach of the U.S. Congress to evaluating a free trade 
agreement.  Pacheco summed up, saying he was \"glad the U.S. 
Government is so concerned with so points; the average 
Dominican thinks that the U.S. does not care about them.\" 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOR: A DEPENDABLE PARTNER 
 
5. (U) Minister of Labor Milton Ray Guevarra, favorably known 
to majority of the delegation, assembled top advisors to 
brief the CAFTA labor team.  These included his wife (a 
candidate for the post of Ombudsman), an Assistant Secretary 
for general matters, the Director General for Labor, the 
Assistant Secretary in charge of child labor programs, the 
Director of Inspections, the Director of Mediation and 
Arbitration, and President Mejia\'s labor attache.  The 
Minister thanked the USG for its support, especially that of 
DOL.  He said his key objectives were eradicating child labor 
and social security reform.  Ray Guevarra cited the new law 
against trafficking and the launch of the Time Bound Program 
as tools to address commercial sexual exploitation of minors 
(reftel).  He emphasized that he and President Mejia strongly 
believe that a free trade agreement will strengthen and 
promote workers\' rights. 
 
6. (U) The delegation asked about Labor Code enforcement. 
Minister Ray Guevarra informed the delegation that, like the 
Central American countries, the GODR had asked the ILO to 
study its labor laws and practices.  He said the labor code 
applies to all workers, Dominican citizens and foreign 
nationals -- including illegal or undocumented residents. 
The ministry thoroughly investigates any complaint. (Note: 
Trade union leaders and NGO activists confirmed this in 
separate meetings, but also pointed out that most Haitian 
migrant workers do not make complaints because they fear 
deportation.  End Note).  The minister acknowledged that 
abuse of foreign workers does occur, but this could not be 
attributed to a flawed labor code. 
 
7. (U) Ray Guevarra noted that 92% of cases that reach labor 
courts are decided in favor of workers.  As for minimum wages 
scales, these are determined by sector, profession and 
locale, since the cost of living varies significantly among 
the 31 provinces.  To address current inflation -- 
approaching 35 percent annually -- the National Committee for 
Salaries has approved an across the board 25% increase in 
minimum wages to be fully implemented by all companies by 
January 2004. 
8. (U) The Director General for Labor said the Ministry of 
Labor has been investigating allegations of abuses in the 
free trade zones, particularly in a case involving a Grupo M 
plant in Santiago.  The Ministry works closely with the 
National Council of Free Trade Zones on such allegations.  In 
two instances, company export licenses were suspended as 
punishment.  The Ministry pays for the services of more than 
50 defense lawyers for a major trade union, FENATRAZONAS 
(National Federation of Workers in Free Trade Zones).  There 
are 3,564 registered unions in the Dominican Republic, 160 of 
them in free trade zones.  The DG noted that a collective 
bargaining agreement was signed in October in a free trade 
zone in Bonao (Note: Details to follow in Human Rights 
Report.  End Note). 
 
BUSINESS COMMUNITY: SLIGHTLY ON THE DEFENSIVE 
 
9. (U) Jeannette Dominguez Aristy, President of the National 
Council of Free Trade Zones, appeared defensive in answering 
questions about freedom of association in the zones.  She 
called the labor code \"very strong.\"  Dominguez finds its 
extremely biased in favor of workers, many of whom are 
\"misguided\" by financial self-interest when they join unions 
or bring complaints against employers.  Regarding the Grupo M 
plant in Santiago, Ms. Dominguez defended the firm as 
\"leading the movement to recognize workers rights in free 
trade zones.\"  She said that unions in Central American 
countries are worse off than those in the Dominican Republic. 
 In her 15 years of experience with free trade zones, 
Dominguez said, she has seen many positive changes, 
particularly because workers are engaged and not left out of 
the process. 
 
COMMENT 
 
10. (SBU) The CAFTA labor team said the visit was useful. 
Their highest marks go to the Ministry of Labor for several 
reasons: the request for an ILO study, the agreement of all 
sectors that the Ministry does pursue complaints, and the 
fact that the Mejia administration kept on board experienced 
Ministry officials from the previous administration.  Trade 
unionists came across as credible activists with a permanent 
presence in the labor process.  Clatanoff commented that \"the 
rule of labor law is respected and functioning.\"  Also to 
note was the agreement across sectors about the prospective 
benefits of a free trade agreement.  Issues remain to be 
explored, including particularly those of undocumented 
Haitian workers, freedom of association in free trade zones, 
and trade unionists\' concerns with recent social security 
legislation.  The team found that the GODR had responded with 
a willingness to address these and could use its positive 
relations with unions to do so.  End Comment. 
HERTELL 
"
"12128","11/15/2003 20:34","03SANTODOMINGO6581","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 006581 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC-NOYES, DRL/PHD-DAVIS, WHA/CAR-MCISAAC, 
WHA/USOAS-IRVING; STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/RSD-HENDRIX; NSC 
FOR CRUZ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, EAID, PGOV 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC ELECTION LOGISTICS ON TRACK FOR 
MAY 2004 VOTE 
 
 
1. Summary:  Elections Director Gilberto Cruz Herasme, a top 
technical supervisor of the GODR\'s Central Election Board 
(JCE), has told us the JCE is \"90 percent\" on track with its 
published timetable of preparations for the May 16 
presidential election.  He flagged two problems: lack of 
agreement between the JCE and the political parties on the 
composition of 45 municipal election boards (out of 134), and 
recent opposition demands that the JCE\'s technical 
directors.resign.  On the latter issue, the JCE has received 
formal opinions from the two main oppposition parties, but is 
awaiting a reply from the government party before deciding 
whether to retain the directors.  Cruz Herasme emphasized 
that technical arrangements for the election would be \"better 
than ever,\" particularly the JCE\'s efforts to recruit 
qualified poll workers, train as many of them as possible, 
and tighten security.  These arrangements will also extend to 
poll sites overseas, including the United States, enabling 
expatriate Dominicans to vote for the first time.  End 
summary. 
 
Arrangements \"on track\" 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
2. Director of Elections Gilberto Cruz Herasme, a top 
technical supervisor at the GODR\'s Central Elections Board 
(JCE) who is responsible for logistics and security of the 
May 16 presidential election, discussed the status of 
preparations with poloff and USAID expert October 28.  Cruz 
Erasme, who had worked at JCE during the 1996 and 2000 
presidential elections and two legislative/municipal 
elections, assured us the board was \"90 percent\" on track 
with a previously published timetable. 
 
Political parties\' consent 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
3. Cruz Herasme voiced concern that appointees to 45 of the 
134 municipal election boards (juntas municipales 
electorales) had not yet gained approval by political party 
reps, a formal requirement.  The problems affected boards in 
the biggest cities, Santo Domingo and Santiago.  The JCE 
would need the political parties\' consent \"at every step\" of 
the process, he explained.  However, the process was as far 
along as it had been in 1995 for the 1996 election, which 
international observers had judged to be free and fair.  The 
chairman of the JCE\'s administrative chamber, Judge Nelson 
Arias, subsequently told the press that the current problems 
would be resolved by mid-November.  (Comment: This deadline 
may be unrealistic for some of the juntas.) 
 
Opposition demands 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
3. The election director\'s other current concern related to 
repeated demands by the main opposition parties (PRSC and 
PLD) that he and three other JCE technical directors resign 
because of perceived irregularities in the 2002 legislative 
and municipal elections.  He said it was increasingly 
difficult for him to work with the political party delegates 
to the election process as long as this issue remained 
unresolved, even though only one of the parties -- the PLD -- 
had included him in the list of officials to be removed.  The 
JCE had received written opinions on the matter from the two 
parties, but was waiting for the ruling PRD to deliver its 
views before making a decision whether to retain the 
directors.  (Note: Action by the JCE\'s nine judges was 
subsequently postponed until November 17.) 
 
Budget uncertainty 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
4. Asked whether the JCE would have an adequate budget for 
the election, given the GODR\'s severe economic problems, Cruz 
Herasme said that the GODR\'s budget request of RD $1.882 
billion (US $51 million) would suffice, but that its 
legislative approval was uncertain.  He cited press reports 
of a possible cut to RD $1.481 billion (US $40 million) and 
said JCE magistrates would lobby with lawmakers to win 
support for the original request.  (He noted that in similar 
fashion Congress had cut the budget for the 2000 election on 
orders from the late political strongman and former president 
Joaquin Balaguer.)  However, he said, the NGO \"Coalition for 
Transparency\" has offered training assistance to the JCE to 
supplement its official resources and that the offer would be 
included in the JCE\'s plans.   (Note: This NGO coalition 
includes the prominent USAID-funded NGO \"Participacion 
Ciudadana\" -- Citizen Participation.) 
 
Recruitment and training of workers 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
5. Cruz Herasme emphasized the JCE\'s efforts to recruit 
better qualified personnel as poll workers, political party 
delegates to the polls, and municipal board members.  The JCE 
expects to provide training through local universities for as 
many of the 62,500 polling site personnel as possible, and 
also to offer training to thousands of political party 
delegates. This had been a weak point in previous elections. 
He said starting in January the JCE would hold workshops for 
poll workers and political delegates, including a module on 
how to observe and detect electoral fraud.  For the first 
time, the JCE would evaluate poll workers\' performance and 
award prizes or extra compensation if merited. 
 
Security of polls 
- - - - - - - - - 
 
6. Security personnel to protect polling sites and election 
officials, drawn as usual from the National Police and armed 
forces, would also receive university-organized training, 
according to Cruz Herasme.  He said the JCE was adopting a 
new anti-fraud measure, which other countries had used 
successfully: sealing in transparent plastic the hand-written 
vote tally sheets (actas) from each polling table (colegio) 
to prevent their being altered en route to the municipal 
electoral board to be entered into the JCE computer system. 
 
Registration problems 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
7. Cruz Herasme referred to longstanding problems with 
voters\' identification cards and the fact that as many as 
half of the 3.2 million registered voters did not appear on 
the electoral roll at their assigned voting tables.  He said 
the registration deadline had been extended to January 16 and 
additional centers for identification card issuance would 
open in November, instead of early May as in previous 
elections..  In addition, the newly adopted system of \"open\" 
polling tables -- in which voters could come and go 
throughout election day -- would allow time for individual 
voters to resolve deficiencies of the electoral roll and i.d. 
cards. 
 
Absentee voting 
- - - - - - - - 
 
8. The logistical and security arrangements would also be 
extended for the first time to polling sites overseas, 
enabling expatriate Dominican citizens to participate. Cruz 
Herasme said the JCE would establish polling tables and local 
electoral boards in several cities in the U.S. (New York and 
Miami, in coordination with local authorities) and other 
countries with significant Dominican populations.  The would 
use trained personnel and security measures on a par with 
those at home.  He said the election officials would work at 
politically neutral sites such as hotels or clubs, rather 
than Dominican consulates. 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
9. Cruz Herasme, one of the JCE\'s top technical supervisors, 
impressed us with his professionalism, knowledge, and ongoing 
implementation of detailed plans to improve the logistics and 
security of the election process for 2004.  The technical 
aspects  of the election appear to be well in hand, provided 
the JCE takes the announced measures to facilitate 
registration and issuance of i.d. cards.  The continuing 
public skepticism of the JCE and its intentions is a legacy 
of the way in which the GODR pushed the current judges\' 
appointments through the PRD-dominated Congress last year. 
The transparency shown so far by the by the judges in the 
JCE\'s recently reorganized administrative chamber and a 
continued strong technical performance by Cruz Herasme and 
his colleagues should help build public confidence.  The 
JCE\'s main challenge will be political, not technical -- 
convincing the public that it will administer the election 
evenhandedly. 
 
10. We think it unlikely the JCE will yield to the opposition 
complaints and fire Cruz Herasme, who is generally well 
regarded for his work in past elections.  The JCE believes 
changing key personnel so close to the election would disrupt 
preparations.  However, we cannot rule out a decision to 
placate the critics by tossing out one of the JCE officials, 
perhaps the supervisor of the computing section, whom some 
have accused of irregularities in the 2002 election. 
Whether he stays or goes, the JCE has already approached the 
business community to assign some of its computer experts to 
help prepare for election day. 
HERTELL 
"
"12129","11/15/2003 20:42","03SANTODOMINGO6582","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 006582 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FROM AMBASSADOR HERTELL TO THE DEPUTY SECRETARY AND TO WHA 
ASSISTANT SECRETARY NORIEGA; DEPT TREASURY FOR U/S TAYLOR; 
NSC FOR SHANNON; DEPT ALSO FOR EB, G/TIP, INL, WHA/CAR 
(GILROY) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EFIN, ETRD, DR 
SUBJECT: HOW BEST TO SUPPORT U.S. INTERESTS IN THE 
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC -- RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
1.  (SBU) The difficult economic situation in the Dominican 
Republic, coinciding with the early stages of a presidential 
campaign, presents a complex of challenges to United States 
interests in the country.  I consider it essential to 
continue to support the administration of President Hipolito 
Mejia.  I take into account Mejia,s pro-U.S. policies on 
Iraq and the Middle East, his close law enforcement 
cooperation, his advocacy of free trade,  and his signature 
of an Article 98 agreement.  Equally important, and 
transcending the relationship with the current 
administration, is the need to assure institutional 
stability, with transparency and inclusiveness of political 
process, while strengthening economic, judicial and political 
reforms. 
 
2.  (SBU) I believe that all significant political actors and 
the Dominican public will respond positively to USG actions 
and statements supporting GODR efforts to face economic and 
political difficulties squarely and responsibly.  The USG can 
help shape dialogue on the key issues, so as to focus on 
positive actions and institutional reforms rather than on the 
casting of blame.  The United States is necessarily a major 
presence for the Dominican Republic, through trade, 
investment, shared values and interests, geography, and the 
number of Dominicans residing in the United States.  Our 
voice and example have an extraordinary weight in Dominican 
domestic events. 
 
3.  (SBU) Following are my proposals to the Department and 
other agencies for constructive actions to be undertaken in 
the short term by the USG: 
 
-- Senior level civilian visits.  I suggest that Assistant 
Secretary Noriega and Treasury Under Secretary Taylor make 
 
SIPDIS 
separate one-day working visits to Santo Domingo before the 
end-of-year holidays.  The senior visitors could deliver a 
frank admonition to President Mejia to stay on track with the 
IMF despite the election pressures and could meet with other 
prominent political and congressional leaders to deliver a 
message of support to Dominicans generally.  In particular, 
Assistant Secretary Noriega could deliver strong words of 
encouragement to combat corruption and prosecute individuals 
for corrupt behavior, further developing the testimony to 
Congress which received a great deal of attention here.  The 
Embassy can program a full, appropriate round of media 
contacts.  Senior USG visitors could address the joint houses 
of the legislature, for example, or could speak at other 
prestigious local institutions.  The general political 
message would be distinct but complementary to that of U.S. 
Trade Representative Zoellick at the mid-January opening in 
Santo Domingo of bilateral trade talks. 
 
-- Military visits and assistance.  I would welcome the visit 
of appropriate Pentagon officials or senior military, such as 
Commander of Southern Command General Hill.  I understand 
that DOD and State may have the option to increase various 
categories of military assistance and are studying the 
possibility of doing so.  If a senior visitor could make 
early public announcement of such measures, this would 
emphasize U.S. solidarity with the GODR and would show valued 
appreciation for GODR willingness to shoulder 
responsibilities in the Coalition of the Willing.  This U.S. 
engagement would stress the principled nature of the decision 
to send the Quisqueya Battalion to Iraq for a year and would 
help to counteract the emphasis by some of the downside risks. 
 
-- Accelerating IFI consideration.  Assistance from the 
international financial institutions will be crucial in 
overcoming the crippling financial plight of the GODR and of 
the financial system.   The GODR must come to terms, quickly, 
with the IMF negotiating team arriving tomorrow.  I believe 
that they will do so and I will continue to stress that 
message.  Once the standby is renewed, the GODR will need to 
tap other sources of lending.  I understand the previously 
developed World Bank loan of USD 200 million for electric 
sector reform cannot be carried forward, given the 
government\'s buy-back of Union Fenosa holdings in the system. 
 USG agencies and the U.S. Executive Director at the World 
Bank can urge the Bank to draw up a fast-disbursing 
structural adjustment loan to help meet the urgent needs to 
plan restructuring and to cover arrears in the electricity 
sector.  The USG can advocate a similar approach at the IDB. 
 
-- Increased support for Dominican institutional reform.  One 
of the massively contributing causes to the current 
macroeconomic plight of the country is banking fraud at 
Baninter, Bancredito and Banco Mercantil, the tally for which 
has now risen to near USD 3 billion (approximately 15 percent 
of GDP).  The instability in the exchange rate and many 
financial indicators stems in large part from the distrust of 
the public in its own financial institutions.  USG agencies 
are already active in legal cooperation and investigation -- 
Homeland Security, Treasury, DEA, State/INL, and Justice, 
most prominently.  This work is extremely valuable and should 
be reinforced and given additional funding, particularly for 
programs that promote technical training, professionalism and 
effective practice by the Dominicans.  A U.S.-based 
prosecution of Dominican criminals would deliver a powerful 
message.  Increased assistance to financial regulation, to 
the judiciary, and to fraud investigation would demonstrate 
our conviction that sound institutions are fundamental to 
sustainable economic development.  In this connection I ask 
that Washington fund fully and as quickly as possible USD 
300,000 to support technical assistance related to complex 
banking fraud. 
 
-- Election monitoring.  We are six months away from a 
presidential election.  This Embassy has requested financing 
for electoral observers and understands that NDI and IFES 
have drawn up proposals.  I consider it vital that the 
Dominican public understand that the United States is 
completely impartial in this contest, regardless of our good 
relations with the Mejia administration.  It is equally vital 
that we provide financial support for effective election 
monitoring to ensure public faith in the democratic process 
and its results.  An early pledge will emphasize our policy 
that citizens must be empowered with full rights of 
participation and a voice in choosing their government, in 
free, fair and transparent elections. 
 
-- Law enforcement support.  Key enforcement priorities in 
the Dominican Republic include counter-terrorism, 
counter-narcotics, anti-trafficking-in-persons, illegal alien 
smuggling, visa and passport fraud, counterfeiting, and 
money-laundering.  Any additional funding for these programs 
would bring a direct benefit to U.S. interests and a pay-off 
in further increases in cooperation. 
HERTELL 
"
"12239","11/19/2003 19:15","03SANTODOMINGO6664","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 006664 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA - A/S NORIEGA,DAS DESHAZO; WHA/CAR, WHA/PPC, 
WHA/EPSC, INR/AA; NSC FOR SHANNON; TREASURY FOR U/S TAYLOR, 
LEE, TOLOUI; SECDEF FOR OSD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, EFIN, ETRD, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTIONS SERIES #1: SIX MONTHS TO THE 
PRESIDENTIALS 
 
 
1.  (SBU) Following is the first in a series on the 
presidential elections in the Dominican Republic. 
 
(begin text) 
 
       SIX MONTHS TO THE PRESIDENTIALS 
 
Incumbent Hipolito Mejia of the Dominican Revolutionary Party 
(PRD) is hitting about 20 percent in various polls in the 
Dominican Republic, while former president Leonel Fernandez 
(1996-2000) of the Dominican Liberation Party (PLD) is 
comfortably scoring almost 60 percent when matched with any 
of the other declared aspirants. Those polls come well ahead 
of any serious direct debate between the two; researchers are 
varied and may be slanting questions; though far apart, the 
numbers will narrow.  Perpetually in third place, Eduardo 
Estrella is dealing with a grumbling opposition within the 
Reformist Social Christian Party (PRSC) but is generally 
considered to be an unlikely third-place (and perhaps 
third-rate) performer. 
 
Six months of campaigning will change those numbers. 
 
President Mejia should not be counted out, despite widespread 
and deep discontent with his economic policies.  \"He has a 
fuel to burn yet,\" Santo Domingo\'s most prominent attorney 
told Ambassador Hertell last week.  Mejia is dividing his 
time between presiding and running for office.  In both roles 
he is perpetually in motion. 
 
As President, Mejia is working toward an accommodation with 
the IMF following his precipitous decision in early September 
to buy back two electricity distribution firms from Spanish 
firm Union Fenosa.  He obtained from monetary authorities a 
5.15 percent increase in exchange charges for imports and on 
November 18 finally got a reluctant PRD-dominated Senate to 
approve a 5 percent levy on exports (the measure now goes to 
the House).  He successfully challenged exporters and 
hoteliers to commit to defined contributions to meet GODR 
revenue goals previously set with the IMF.  He has just 
ridden out a mostly peaceful --  and successful -- national 
strike on November 11, while reminding citizens in rhetoric 
and with a display of police and military presence that he is 
still in charge. 
 
As candidate for re-nomination, Mejia is playing a boisterous 
game with six rivals within the PRD and just secured a formal 
agreement from the three most prominent of them to contest 
the nomination in a party convention in December.  The 
disbursement this week of USD 100 million by the 
Inter-American Development Bank for the social sector gives 
him the means to deliver on small-scale projects across the 
country.  Mejia pitches his comments in vigorous and 
frequently vulgar colloquialisms toward the common citizen 
and seeks to come across as a \"crafty peasant.\" 
 
Fernandez, in contrast, is busy sounding presidential. 
Heading his own lavishly-funded \'Global Foundation for 
Development,\' he recently traveled to deliver speeches in 
Madrid, San Juan and New York (Columbia University and the 
UN).  He comfortably criticizes Mejia for the fall in the 
value of the peso, for the banking scandals, for falling into 
the hands of the IMF - - in brief, for all the country\'s 
ills.  In September at a political event he went so far as to 
assert the collapse of the (notoriously corrupt) Banco 
Intercontinental (Baninter) \"was not the fault of the bank\'s 
officers, it was the fault of the 
government.\"  Intellectuals, one of the PLD\'s traditional 
constituencies, have begun to fulminate about Fernandez\'s 
\"triumphalism\" and his mendacity.  The PLD continues 
presenting him as a smooth-talking statesman blameless for 
Dominican ills. 
 
There\'s a long game ahead.  There are a lot of longtime PRD 
stalwarts mooting the idea that Mejia would do best for the 
country simply by dropping his campaign for re-election.  If 
Mejia secures the PRD nomination - - and his command of 
patronage and party structures suggests that he can if he 
wants to do so - - then Hipolito Mejia will carry out some 
serious savaging of Leonel Fernandez.  Many expect that 
Fernandez\'s acceptance of generous retainers from Baninter 
will provide the starting point. 
 
Some big issues will affect the fortunes of both, and of all 
candidates: 
 
- - The IMF and austerity.  With inflation approaching 40 
percent and the peso at barely half its 2002 value in 
exchange markets, the challenge to Mejia is to make the IMF 
agreement comprehensible to the public and to make it work. 
He will need to convince them that Fernandez is at least 
partly to blame for the corruption and fraud that drove the 
government to seek IMF help.  Fernandez will put the blame 
for every pinch and groan on Mejia. 
 
- - Corruption and impunity of malefactors.  Each will seek 
to tar the other.  The enrichment of associates and families 
will be alleged; Fernandez\'s Global Foundation, set up and 
constructed with generous private donations, will be 
presented as built on graft. 
 
- - Free trade negotiations with the United States.  Mejia\'s 
team is ready and is convinced of the possible benefits to 
gain in the tight schedule of negotiations, January to March 
of 2004, just as the election race reaches white heat. 
Dominican negotiators understand the parameters and the 
limits set by the U.S.-Chile model.  Mejia will portray the 
outcome to his advantage, whether an agreement is reached or 
not.  Fernandez will criticize every step of the way, 
suggesting undue U.S. influence and scaring farmers and 
workers.  Conservative voters may perceive Fernandez becoming 
more firmly anti-U.S. and 
will recall even more vividly his establishment of diplomatic 
relations with Cuba. 
 
- - Electricity.  There\'s plenty of blame for both sides on 
this one and little prospect that power supplies will improve 
significantly before the May elections.  The privatization of 
state enterprises occurred on Fernandez\'s watch and was 
unpopular then; the continuing blackouts and the government 
failure to make the system work are Mejia\'s headache.  Some 
observers think that Mejia can take credit for throwing out 
the \"rascals\" of Union Fenosa, while others think his 
agreement to buy their shares at a premium was the worst 
possible solution. 
 
- - Dominican soldiers in Iraq.  Mejia knows that any injury 
or death in the Quisqueya battalion in Iraq will prompt an 
outcry that could affect the course of the elections. 
Dominican partnership in the Coalition of the Willing will be 
hotly debated and Fernandez will use it to argue that Mejia 
is too close to the United States.  We believe that Mejia 
will be steadfast in seeing the batallion serve out his 
formal twelve-month commitment, even despite these risks, 
especially if he perceives greater appreciation from 
Washington. 
 
In sum, the game is just beginning in the Dominican 
presidential elections.  Embassy Santo Domingo expects to be 
providing a lively account throughout the next six months. 
This piece is the first of a series of reports, which we aim 
to make them short, focused, frequent and relatively 
informal. 
 
(end text) 
 
2.  (U) Drafted by: Michael Meigs. 
KUBISKE 
"
"12240","11/19/2003 20:39","03SANTODOMINGO6669","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006669 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION SERIES #2: PRD AND PRSC -- 
STRETCHING UNTIL THEY BREAK 
 
1.  Following is the second in Embassy Santo Domingo\'s series 
on the 2004 presidential elections: 
 
(begin text) 
 
PRD and PRSC  - -  STRETCHING UNTIL THEY BREAK 
 
(Meetings sponsored over the weekend by rivals in the parties 
provided the spectacle of splits and the prospect of 
breakdown.) 
 
Rival groups in the Dominican Revolutionary Party (PRD) 
convened their competing versions of the PRD National 
Executive Committee (CEN) on November 15, with sharply 
contrasting outcomes.  Following his November 13 \"open 
letter\" to President arguing against a re-election effort, 
CEN chair Hugo Tolentino Dipp declined to attend either 
event. 
 
The PRD CEN meeting at the Hotel Embajador presided by 
Secretary of Culture Tony Raful endorsed proposals negotiated 
 
SIPDIS 
between the \"Project for Hipolito\" (PPH) and three PRD rivals 
to keep open the lists for presidential nominations until 
November 30, to select the winner on a \"50 percent plus one 
vote\" basis, and to confirm the results a week after the 
vote.  They selected Peggy Cabral, widow of the PRD,s 
charismatic leader Jose Francisco Pena Gomez, to organize a 
convention on December 14.  Featured participants along with 
President Mejia,s campaign manager Secretary of Agriculture 
Eligio Jaquez were three cooperating rivals for the 
nomination - - Vice President Milagros Ortiz Bosch, Rafael 
Subervi, and Enmanuel Esquea.  The 550 members of this 
832-member CEN were two hours late in starting their event 
but made up for it with their enthusiasm.  They elected a 
full list of party officials and confirmed session president 
Secretary of Culture Tony Raful as President of the PRD. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
At the same time, across town at the offices of the Socialist 
International, a meeting of 1071 members of the other, rival 
PRD National Executive Committee of 1300 faithful was chaired 
by PRD President Hatuey Decamps, fierce opponent of 
\"continuism\" in presidential politics.  Decamps announced 
that he would not, after all, have to carry out his published 
intention to suspend Tony Raful from the post of acting PRD 
president, since Raful had provided a letter of resignation 
that same day.  In fact, this version of the PRD CEN chose 
the absent Raful to serve as vice president of the party. 
They elected a full list of party officials and gave Hatuey 
Decamps the authority to fill any vacancy and to set the date 
of a national convention (on November 18 he designated 
December 7, with confirmation of the results on December 14; 
the Political Committee of the Hatuey rump congress voted to 
bar the President from registering a candidacy for 
re-election). 
 
While the PRD constituted itself formally into two rival 
organizations, the Reformist Social Christian Party (PRSC) 
was moving rapidly in the same direction.  On November 13 the 
PRSC Executive Council formally suspended former presidential 
candidate Jacinto Peynado and two senior supporters for 
failing to respect party discipline.  Peynado,s group had 
adamantly insisted on far-reaching changes in party 
leadership and insisted on overturning the March 2003 party 
selection of Eduardo Estrella as the PRSC presidential 
candidate.  They claim that Mejia\'s PPH tampered in that 
election, throwing it to Estrella with the intent of 
weakening the party.  Peynado and supporters formally 
appealed their suspensions to the National Elections Board. 
 
Peynado was in Miami for medical treatment, but his son, the 
previously suspended supporters and PRSC members said to 
constitute two-thirds of the membership of the National 
Executive Committee met on Sunday, November 16, at the San 
Carlos Club.  They voted to expel from office PRSC President 
Rafael Bello Andino and several other senior officials but 
named no replacements for them.  Sitting as observers at the 
pro-Peynado conclave were notables from the PRD, the PLD and 
lesser parties.  A third PRSC aspirant to leadership, 
Francisco \"Quique\" Atun, was not present but has managed to 
keep up cordial contacts with both groups. 
 
Leonel Fernandez of the PLD made a point of scheduling a 
successful political rally the same weekend with the \"Somos 
Mas\" faction of his party, which served previously as the 
party campaign vehicle for his rival Jaime David Fernandez 
Mirabal.  His message: \"Those who cannot govern themselves 
are in no condition to govern the country.\" 
 
(end text) 
 
2.  Drafter:  Michael Meigs 
KUBISKE 
"
"12242","11/19/2003 20:57","03SANTODOMINGO6670","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE318063","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006670 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) AND IO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, IR, DR 
SUBJECT: SANTO DOMINGO DELIVERS UNGA 3RD COMMITTEE POINTS 
 
REF: STATE 318063 
 
 1.  Poloff delivered reftel talking points on November 17, 
to Dominican Deputy Director for International Organizations, 
Ambassador Rhadys Abreu de Polanco.  Ambassador Abreu had no 
immediate comment.  Substantive comment will be reported 
septel. 
KUBISKE 
"
"12260","11/20/2003 11:07","03SANTODOMINGO6671","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 006671 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/IFD; DEPT PASS USAID; 
NSC FOR SHANNON; TREASURY FOR U/S TAYLOR, NLEE, LLAMONICA; 
DHS PASS CUSTOMS FOR MIAMI:FUENTES; BRIDGETOWN FOR D CHAINER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/18/2010 
TAGS: EFIN, PGOV, EAID, CJAN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN BANKING SERIES #1: BANINTER CASE - WILL 
IT GET PROSECUTED? 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske.  Reason:  1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1.  (U) Following is the first in a series of reports on the 
Dominican banking sector. 
 
(Begin Text) 
 
BANINTER CASE -- WILL IT GET PROSECUTED? 
 
(C) Dominican banking officials have been gratified by USG 
interest in the investigation of the case of \"Ramoncito\" Baez 
Figueroa\'s Baninter, which collapsed last April and left 
behind it bad debts of more than USD 2.1 billion.  They and 
others remain deeply pessimistic that the Dominican judiciary 
will stay the course and obtain convictions of Baez and his 
colleagues.  The best outcome, many Dominicans muse, would be 
for the United States to extradite the whole lot and try them 
in the United States. 
 
(SBU) The Ambassador and embassy staff have discouraged such 
expectations and challenged Dominicans to demonstrate to a 
doubting public the firmness of their intentions.  Even so, 
many remain convinced that the upcoming elections season will 
provide enough distraction for a deal to be struck by 
someone, somewhere. 
 
(C) In early September, President Mejia passed to the Embassy 
six thick binders of Baninter material, including summary 
reports of the documented activities.  That same week, at the 
conclusion of a working visit by Homeland Security (Customs) 
regional attache Bob Fuentes and Treasury\'s regional 
contractor David Chainer, the Monetary Board authorized 
Central Bank Governor Jose Lois Malkun to make a formal 
request for cooperation with their agencies. Informal 
exchanges have been cordial and effective since then; for 
example, on October 18-20 Central Bank contractor Jose Duarte 
and an emboff went to Miami to talk business with Homeland 
Security, with the law firm hired by the GODR to pursue asset 
recovery, and with the U.S. attorney\'s office. 
 
(C) Central Bank Governor Lois Malkun and Banking 
Superintendent Julio Cross have been dogged in their pursuit 
of the Baninter case.  They persist in the face of the lack 
of technical expertise to guide investigators, the obvious 
inexperience of the Dominican jurists in defining and proving 
a case, and the misgivings of those many individuals inside 
the government and out who accepted Baez\'s favors in the 
glory days.  Ramoncito had his hooks into almost everyone. 
 
(C) Embassy officers got to interview the Central Bank 
contractor who walked into the bank last May with nothing 
more than verbal instructions to begin the intervention, and 
we have spent a lot of time with lawyers and managers from 
the Bank superintendency.  They tell us that the evidence of 
fraud is ample and undeniable.  Even so, we are concerned to 
find that while lots of time is being spent combing through 
the files, not enough is being done by the Dominicans to 
track assets, to assure an air-tight case against the 
culprits, or to identify the sources of funds.  An Amcit 
consultant we brought in with NAS funds for a two-week 
assessment in October confirmed this impression.  Most of 
Baninter\'s physical assets have been sold off, but it appears 
that to date almost none of Baez\'s personal assets have been 
seized, even though the Money Laundering Law effective 
September 2002 provides for that possibility.  The only 
significant exception is the \"Listin Diario\" newspaper, under 
government-appointed management since June. 
 
The investigation 
 
(SBU) Magistrate Eduardo Sanchez Ortiz was assigned by lot 
last June to investigate the case.  The law provides in most 
cases for only 60-90 days of investigation; Sanchez Ortiz 
recently received his fifth 30-day extension, in recognition 
of his need to consult banking experts to make sense of the 
voluminous material from the bank, drawn not only from 
Baninter headquarters but also from 29 filing cabinets found 
tucked away in a distant warehouse. Almost all the records 
are still available and are stored in a location which the 
experts refuse to name, even to us.  Sanchez acknowledges 
being seriously challenged by the complexity of the task.  We 
understand that one of his first sessions in May was a 
two-hour tutorial in double-entry bookkeeping.  He 
subsequently received tutoring and extensive study materials 
on the 2002 Money Laundering Law.  He recently attended a 
workshop given at the Judiciary School on the legal aspects 
of money laundering and complex fraud cases. In October the 
Supreme Court contracted an expert accountant with banking 
experience to work with Sanchez; he had requested two 
experts. Baez Figueroa\'s attorneys challenged the expert last 
week as potentially biased, since their client had fired the 
accountant\'s wife from Baninter. 
 
(SBU) Appreciation of the fine art of accounting is essential 
in this case. For more than a decade Baez Figueroa and 
several close associates systematically ran overdrafts of 
client accounts and covered them up by creating phantom 
certificates of deposit (instruments that until very recently 
were not tracked or verified by the regulatory authorities). 
The complex scheme was tracked in specially created software 
which comprised a \"covert\" bank, reintegrated daily with open 
accounts but accessible during workhours only to Baez and his 
confederates. 
 
(SBU) Presentation of the facts will be vital.  Under 
Dominican procedure the case against the Bantiner crew will 
be judged exclusively on documents and observations delivered 
by Sanchez Ortiz to the sitting judge; there is no provision 
for the judge to obtain further evidence.  If Sanchez Ortiz 
fails to file an adequate brief -- for whatever reason -- the 
case will be full of holes, making it all the more likely 
that Baez Figueroa and friends will go free. 
 
\"Ramoncito\" Down and Out? 
 
(C) Baez Figueroa became notorious in the late 90\'s for his 
flamboyant spending, high profile publicity campaigns and 
generous handouts to individuals, institutions and good 
causes. There appears to be no Dominican law prohibiting 
officials from accepting such donations. The bank collapse 
made a lot of people nervous, as they wondered how far 
prosecutions might extend. In contrast to that high 
lifestyle, Baez has been sitting in jail since last May, 
despite persistent rumors that his political connections and 
vast funds will get him sprung. President Mejia declared to 
the Ambassador earlier this month that Baez deserved to be in 
jail and would damn well stay there.   Of the four bank 
officials originally arrested, only Baez and Marcel Baez 
Cocos remain in jail.  Amcit Luis Alvarez Renta was freed in 
the first week of September to seek medical treatment -- 
which he promptly sought in Miami and Boston.  Despite his 
attorney\'s pledges of good faith, Alvarez Renta remains in 
the United States.  Vivian Lubrano, also released on medical 
grounds, is still in the Dominican Republic. 
 
(C) Baninter is the grandest bank fraud and collapse in 
Dominican history, but other bank failures are likely to give 
rise to court cases.  Dominicans are watching these cases 
with growing cynicism and with the expectation of being 
severely disappointed by their government and judiciary. 
Knowledgeable observers comment that the institutions to 
maintain, regulate and police the financial system here 
simply do not exist yet.  President Mejia and his 
administration have done more than many expected, but the 
wily Baez has lots of resources -- and many speculate that in 
the current electoral climate, time is on his side.  The 
matter-of-fact acceptance of corruption across Dominican 
society is a continuing sore.  Much more must be done to 
strengthen investigations and to provide prosecution 
expertise, so as to demonstrate to the many bad guys, to 
complaisant officials and to the Dominican public that 
corruption can - -  and should - - be detected and deterred. 
 
 
 
KUBISKE 
"
"12278","11/20/2003 21:44","03SANTODOMINGO6705","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 006705 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC; TREASURY FOR U/S TAYLOR, 
DAS N LEE, R TOLUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN INSIDER VIEW OF FINANCIAL ISSUES, IMF 
TALKS 
 
 
1.  (U) On November 20 Technical Secretary of the Dominican 
Presidency Carlos Despradel called on DCM to outline state of 
play with the IMF.  He provided current copies of the 
worksheets elaborated with IMF help.  (See separate pages.) 
Following is his presentation (i.e., his views). 
 
2.  (SBU) Summary table,  percent of GDP 
 
                                                    2003 
                         2004 
Program     Actual            Program     Projected 
 
CENTRAL GOVT 
Expenditure       - 0.4       - 1.8       1.1         -0.9 
 
Public Sector 
Non Financial           - 0.3       -0.9        0 
-1.2 
                  --------          -------- 
---------         ------- 
SUBTOTAL          -0.7        -2.7        1.1         -2.2 
 
Quasi fiscal            -2.8        -2.9        -3.6 
-3.9 
                  -------           ------            ------- 
      ------ 
 
TOTAL       -3.5        -5.6        -2.5        -6.1 
 
Difference                               -2.1 
                          -3.6 
 
3. (SBU) Despradel is hoping that the IMF might accept a plan 
that would reduce the projected deficit to 4.0 percent of 
GDP.  This would require the GODR to raise revenues (or lower 
expenditures) by 2.1 percent of GDP, or by 12 billion RD 
pesos. 
 
4.  (SBU) IMF team insists that Congress enact any revenue 
measures before the standby is submitted to the board. 
Despradel pointed to the difficulties in Congress of the 5% 
tax on exports ) passed finally by the Senate and now going 
to the House of Representatives.  Congress meets only until 
Christmas time and then has a recess until February 27, by 
which time the election season will be in full swing. 
Presidential elections are May 16.  At that time no 
Congressman will be willing to vote tax increases. 
 
5. (SBU)  Possible sources of funds not requiring 
congressional approval could include fuel price adjustments. 
Could envisage a maximum increase in electricity rates of 40 
percent; could reduce subsidy on household cooking gas. 
Estimated yield would be up to 1.5 percent of GDP, if willing 
to face an 80 percent rise in electricity prices.  If less, 
then yield would be about 1 percent. 
 
6.  (SBU) Tax reform,  in the short term - - as demanded by 
the private sector - - is not feasible, in Despradel,s view. 
 Congress would not go along.  Private sector is apprehensive 
that a future government would not be willing to pursue 
reform.  Mejia,s ministers are refusing to take this road, 
out of political/electoral considerations.  Despradel is 
telling the IMF and private sector that this is simply not 
feasible.  He comments that the private sector endorses tax 
reform as a concept, but individual firms will continue to 
avoid taxation.  He insists that tax reform cannot be made a 
pre-condition for an IMF program.  &IMF must see that we can 
deliver only that which is possible - - right now, even the 
ruling party and the PRSC opposition party are badly split 
among themselves.  \" I will tell them so when I meet them 
this afternoon.\" 
 
7. (SBU)  Electricity sector.    Most recent subsidy estimate 
by team from Central Bank/ Presidency/Electricity 
Council/Foreign Ministry is that @ exchange rate of RD$ 40 = 
US$ 1 and with fuel oil at today,s rate of about $26/bbl, 
the gap, and hence the government financing requirement, is 
US $28 million/month, that is, about US $168 million to get 
through the next six months.  This calculation does not 
address any GODR arrears to generators currently outstanding. 
 It does not take into account sums of  approximately $104 
million run up by Union Fenosa in its administration of 
EDESUR and EDENORTE.  The GODR budget for 2004 now has 4000 
million pesos in subsidies; ministers voted yesterday not to 
exceed that amount.  Difficulty is that cooking gas subsidy, 
previously 20 million pesos/week, is now at 60 million/week 
or 250 million/month, equal to 3000 million/year ) cooking 
gas will absorb 75 percent of planned subisidies, leaving 
little for electricity. 
 
8. (SBU) Despradel outlined the Madrid Agreement (of 2002?), 
with which the various generators agreed that in return for a 
one-time payment totaling $150 million, they would agree to 
drop contractual rates established in earlier years, all 
negotiated during crisis times and therefore above market 
rates, according to Despradel.  Instead, they would sell 
electricity at the &spot rate,8 expected to be much lower. 
The World Bank Energy Sector loan of $151 million which would 
have allowed the GODR to pay this amount was blocked by GODR 
decision to buy out Union Fenosa. 
 
9. (SBU) The World Bank is preparing instead a 
fast-disbursing Structural Adjustment Loan and has spoken of 
about $80 million, with $40 million to be available quickly 
with no or few conditions and another $40 million in six 
months time (after elections), subject to conditions. 
Despradel says given the need for $168 million in &future 
arrears8 plus the money needed to put the Madrid Agreement 
into effect and the sums owed to Union Fenosa, this would not 
be enough.  He is asking for $100 million quickly, i.e., 
without conditions, with another $50 million later.  He is 
also asking for more World Bank assistance for electricity, 
which could be conditioned on reforms. 
 
10. (SBU) The IDB is preparing an energy loan of $200 million 
to help mitigate the impact on the social sector of 
adjustment.  Initial disbursement would be $100 million. 
Despradel welcomes the finance but notes that these funds are 
needed to carry out the objective of the loan - - to maintain 
social services at previous levels. 
 
11.  (SBU) Despradel said COGENTRIX is the only generator to 
refuse to associate with the Madrid Agreement.  At the 
request of IDB president Enrique Iglesias, in mid-2003 Mejia 
agreed to pay off $42 million in arrears if Iglesias would 
assure that COGENTRIX would begin a renegotiation of contract 
terms.  Mejia is angry that COGENTRIX remained obdurate and 
has vowed not to pay until they do so.  (Current bill is 
about $25 million, and GODR is technically in default since 
November 11 - - this would allow lenders to invoke GODR 
sovereign guarantee of IDB loan of $140 million and of other 
loans, for a total of $400 million.)  Despradel noted that 
COGENTRIX contract was negotiated by the previous (Fernandez) 
government: \". . . and we can suspect what happened with 
that.\" 
 
12. (SBU) Bantiner.  DCM inquired about GODR efforts to 
recover money from Baninter.  Despradel replied that seizure 
and monetization of assets  is not possible until after 
conclusion of a trial. 
 
13. (SBU) Despradel said that he has not been involved in 
Baninter investigation or clean-up.  He  says GODR would 
welcome technical assistance from U.S. Treasury in this 
regard, including in tracking down Baninter funds sent abroad 
or identifying sources of Baninter deposits. 
 
14. (SBU)  Personnel expenditures.   In response to an 
inquiry about possible reductions of the government payroll, 
Despradel said that in his opinion, expenditures were indeed 
high.  He did not indicate any plans to reduce the civil 
service.   He pulled out a table showing the progression of 
government current expenditures in terms of GDP since the 
early 1980,s.  Under Balaguer, the share had progressed 
slowly from 6.8 percent to just over 8 percent; in 1997, the 
first year of the Fernandez administration, it had jumped to 
11 percent and crept higher.  The tendency was maintained, 
not initiated, in the Mejia administration.  (He did not 
point to the 2003 figure, which was increased sharply to over 
14 percent.) 
 
15. (SBU)  Incidence of taxation.   Despradel said that the 
GODR badly needed tax reform.  All talk of tax measures is 
focused on consumption taxes, which fall heavily on the 
poorest.  Despradel said that retailers commonly fail to pay 
the government the value-added tax collected from consumers. 
 Comprehensive tax reform was necessary, he said, but not 
realistic before May.  It is impossible to get a consensus on 
taxing incomes.  Despradel pulled out a chart comparing 
countries according to the sources of tax revenue; the 
Dominican Republic receives 71 percent of revenue from 
consumption taxes and only 26 percent from income taxes.  A 
Harvard consultant advising the government had initially 
discouraged the use of a 1% withholding tax on incomes; after 
analyzing the figures, the consultant had suggested a higher 
rate. 
HERTELL 
"
"12279","11/20/2003 22:11","03SANTODOMINGO6706","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE317277","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006706 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR IO AND WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, DR 
SUBJECT: GODR SUPPORT OF US BACKED UNGA POSITIONS 
 
REF: A. STATE 317277 
 
     B. STATE 309045 
 
1.  Poloff delivered reftel A and B talking points to 
Ambassador Rhadys Abreu de Polanco, Deputy Director of the 
International Organizations Desk at the Dominican Foreign 
Ministry.  Reftel B diplomatic note was delivered to the 
Foreign Ministry on November 12th. 
 
2.  Ambassador Abreu told poloff on November 20, that the 
GODR will vote in support of the Canadian UN resolution on 
the human rights situation in Iran.  She also said that the 
GODR will support Ralph Boyd, the U.S. candidate for the UN 
Committee on the Elimination of all Forms of Racial 
Discrimination (CERD), and vote for him on January 14, in New 
York. 
HERTELL 
"
"12280","11/20/2003 22:13","03SANTODOMINGO6707","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE317277","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006707 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR IO AND WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, DR 
SUBJECT: GODR SUPPORT OF US BACKED UNGA POSITIONS ON IRAN 
AND CERD 
 
REF: A. STATE 317277 
 
     B. STATE 309045 
 
1.  Poloff delivered reftel A and B talking points to 
Ambassador Rhadys Abreu de Polanco, Deputy Director of the 
International Organizations Desk at the Dominican Foreign 
Ministry.  Reftel B diplomatic note was delivered to the 
Foreign Ministry on November 12th. 
 
2.  Ambassador Abreu told poloff on November 20, that the 
GODR will vote in support of the Canadian UN resolution on 
the human rights situation in Iran.  She also said that the 
GODR will support Ralph Boyd, the U.S. candidate for the UN 
Committee on the Elimination of all Forms of Racial 
Discrimination (CERD), and vote for him on January 14, in New 
York. 
HERTELL 
"
"12306","11/21/2003 19:28","03SANTODOMINGO6746","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03SECSTATE321138","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006746 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL 
SUBJECT: ORAL MESSAGE FROM THE SECRETARY ON IRAQI POLITICAL 
TRANSITION 
 
REF: SECSTATE 321138 
 
1.  ECOPOL Counselor delivered Secretary\'s message and 
Embassy\'s informal translation to Vice Foreign Minister on 
November 19 and scheduled an appointment to discuss it on 
November 21. 
HERTELL 
"
"12386","11/25/2003 22:23","03SANTODOMINGO6826","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 006826 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, PGOV 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION SERIES #3: POLITICAL PARTIES 
GIRD FOR CAMPAIGN 
 
 
1. (SBU) Following is the third in our series on the 
Dominican presidential election: 
 
POLITICAL PARTIES GIRD FOR CAMPAIGN 
 
The May 2004 presidential election in the Dominican Republic 
will be the first in more than two decades not to be decided 
by the late strongman and ex-president Joaquin Balaguer.  The 
charismatic founders who long dominated the Dominican 
Revolutionary Party (PRD), Dominican Liberation Party (PLD), 
and Social Christian Reformist Party (PRSC) -- Jose Francisco 
Pena Gomez, Juan Bosch, and Balaguer -- lingered beyond their 
prime and died in recent years.  The passing of the 
\"caudillos\" has made the contest for leadership far more 
lively and far more divisive in the parties. 
 
The ruling PRD and opposition PRSC have each split into 
warring camps led by rival contenders.  The PLD,s candidate, 
former president Leonel Fernandez (1996-2000), is the 
strongest figure in the electoral arena.  The PRD, weakened 
by President Hipolito Mejia,s recent plunge in popularity, 
nonetheless will benefit from his allocation of official 
resources -- public jobs, pork-barrel spending, and 
government favors.   The little-known PRSC candidate Eduardo 
Estrella ranks a distant third.  It is still too early to 
predict who will prevail, since the candidates have barely 
unlimbered their rhetoric and patronage in the opening 
skirmishes of the campaign. 
 
The Tattered White Banner of the PRD 
- - - - - - - -  - - - - - - - - - - 
 
At first glance it appears that the PRD of President Hipolito 
Mejia -- which claims to have 1.6 million loyal voters and 
has committees in every corner of the Dominican Republic -- 
is well enough organized to overwhelm the opposition. 
Centrist and pragmatic, the PRD long ago abandoned its 
revolutionary stance of the 1960s.  But Mejia, a popular 
president during his first two years, has slipped badly in 
approval ratings since 2002 -- voters blame him for the 
country,s severe economic slump and many PRD colleagues 
blame him for seeking reelection after having denied 
repeatedly that he would do so, a shift they believe violates 
party principles.  His low domestic performance rating comes 
close to a negative image of his vision and engagement in the 
international arena.  Dominican voters are more concerned 
about jobs, affordable food and fuel, and electric lights 
than about headlines from Madrid, Brasilia, or Kuwait. 
 
The President,s PPH (Proyecto Presidencial Hipolito) faction 
still controls much of the PRD machine.  Our contacts 
indicate as many as 70 percent of convention (party primary) 
delegates will vote to re-nominate him.  Seven other PRD 
pre-candidates, including influential Tourism Secretary (and 
PRD Secretary General) Rafael \"Fello\" Subervi and Vice 
President Milagros Ortiz-Bosch, have challenged Mejia, based 
on the party,s history of opposing the \'continuismo\' of the 
dictator Trujillo and the perennially (and fraudulently) 
re-elected Balaguer.  Subervi, Ortiz-Bosch and minor figure 
Enmanuel Esquea have cut a deal with Mejia to participate in 
a nominating convention on December 14.  PRD president Hatuey 
DeCamps and three other pre-candidates have announced plans 
for a separate convention December 7 that would exclude 
Mejia.  Negotiations involving senior PRD mediators have 
failed to patch up the schism, and prominent figures in civil 
society including church organizations have taken up the 
anti-reelection cause.  Ortiz-Bosch, Subervi, and others 
expect a Central Election Board (JCE) ruling on the legality 
of whichever multiple PRD candidates emerge from the fog of 
this battle. 
 
The PLD and the Purple-Robed Knight 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
The PLD, with fewer hard-core voters than the PRD (perhaps 
700,000), draws its strength from having (1) a popular former 
president as its candidate and (2) a disciplined party cadre. 
 Leonel Fernandez won the presidency in the 1996 election 
with the help of the conservative Balaguer as much as from 
the PLD founder, leftist intellectual Juan Bosch.  Leonel,s 
accomplishments, particularly privatization of state 
enterprises and economic policies that spurred consistently 
high economic growth, convincingly retired the PLD,s radical 
ideology.  He retained symbolic remnants by establishing 
relations with Fidel Castro,s Cuba.  This year, Fernandez in 
his opposition role has criticized Mejia,s troop 
contribution to the Iraq stabilization force and the plan to 
negotiate a free trade agreement with the United States.  But 
our PLD contacts and Leonel\'s campaign statements on 
attracting investment and creating private sector jobs to 
restore prosperity suggest that if elected he would promote 
common U.S.-Dominican interests in an open economy. 
 
The PLD organization is the leanest of the three, with only 
12,000 full members who have attended the party,s political 
training institute.  Although without official committees in 
all of the nation,s localities, the PLD is strong in Santo 
Domingo and other major cities.  The sense of discipline 
extends even to other senior PLD leaders.  Former 
presidential candidate (in 2000) Danilo Medina now serves as 
Leonel,s campaign manager, and former Dominican Vice 
President (1996-2000) Jaime David Fernandez Mirabal, the 
other contender in this year,s PLD nominating convention, 
recently attached his troops to Leonel,s campaign. 
 
The PLD often tries to portray itself as less corrupt than 
the other parties.  However, the recent massive BANINTER 
banking scandal here reflects inadequate supervision and 
irregularities that predate the present administration, and 
Leonel has acknowledged receipt of consulting fees from the 
collapsed BANINTER.  Additionally, while in office he faced 
accusations of corruption and personal and family enrichment. 
 Some critics speculate that BANINTER-related prosecutions 
might link him to the bank,s illegal financial transfers. 
If hard evidence were to unexpectedly appear in court, PRD 
campaigners would be quick to blast him.  Still, 
anti-corruption themes can cut both ways, so Dominican 
politicians may be reluctant to use them aggressively in the 
campaign. 
 
PRSC Reds in a Cockfight 
- - - - - - - -  - - - - 
 
\"Reformistas\" still lack a convincing champion.  They are 
generally seen as a smaller but still nationwide party that 
will throw its vote to either the PLD or the PRD when the 
time comes. 
 
Reformista veterans of Balaguer,s entourage are mesmerized 
by the current bloodletting in their own camp.  Eduardo 
Estrella won the nomination last March, defeating main rival 
Jacinto Peynado -- a controversial outcome probably swung by 
PRD/PPH supporters crossing over to vote in the PRSC primary. 
 Estrella is a former Secretary of Public Works.  So far he 
has failed to inspire the hundreds of thousands of PRSC 
voters and local organizers throughout the country, despite 
his campaigning in the interior and among Dominicans in New 
York.  Reformistas are frustrated by their low poll numbers 
and leaders\' lax performance.  Indicative is the party,s 
national headquarters, now usually shuttered and surrounded 
by weeds. 
 
Growing pressures exploded in a November 14-16 confrontation 
between Estrella,s group and elder statesmen led by 
Balaguer\'s former vice presidents Jacinto Peynado and Carlos 
Morales Troncoso.  Even if the insurgents succeed in their 
bid to take over the PRSC -- complaints by both sides may 
oblige the JCE to choose between them, implying recognition 
of one or the other -- the party\'s candidate will probably 
have to run against a sitting president (PRD) and a former 
president (PLD).  Peynado remains in the United States under 
treatment for serious illness, commanding lieutenants from 
afar, and Morales Troncoso served too long ago to attract 
many voters.  Neither, alone, has the following or charisma 
to revitalize the party. 
 
If no candidate wins a majority next May 16, the PRSC could 
well be a swing force in the second round.  Mejia,s PPH has 
a cordial relationship with Estrella,s PRSC faction and 
would hope to use this to deliver a PRD victory.  Likewise, 
Leonel,s PLD would appeal to Reformistas, mainly in the 
Peynado wing, who want to unseat Mejia.  No one knows how 
PRSC voters would divide in a second round.  Their squabbling 
leaders are hoarding bargaining chips with which to demand 
cabinet or sub-cabinet posts in the next administration.  And 
hope is not completely extinguished.  If closely matched PLD 
and PRD candidates cut each other to pieces in either phase 
of the battle, even a lackluster Reformista might rally 
enough confused voters to win a second-round upset. 
 
2.  (U) Drafted by: Bainbridge Cowell. 
HERTELL 
"
"12409","11/26/2003 18:55","03SANTODOMINGO6857","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 006857 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/18/2008 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, PGOV, KCOR, KCRM, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN BANKING SERIES #2 - BANCREDITO FAILURE 
BRINGS FORMAL CHARGES OF FRAUD 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske.  Reason: 1.4(b) and (d). 
 
1.  (U) The following is the second in a series of reports on 
fraud cases in the Dominican financial sector. 
 
(begin text) 
 
(U) BANCREDITO 
 
(U) The District Attorney for the city of Santo Domingo 
issued arrest warrants on Friday afternoon, November 7, for 
Manuel Arturo Pellerano Pena and Juan Felipe Mendoza, former 
President and Vice President of Banco Nacional de Credito 
(Bancredito).  The indictment charged them with fraud and 
related crimes.  By Tuesday the 11th, President Mejia had 
suspended the warrants pending further investigation of the 
potential charges, the Pellerano family was taking out 
full-page newspaper ads to defend its honesty and business 
practices, and the public was wondering what was happening. 
The case is still under investigation. 
 
THE FACTS 
 
(U) On November 7, the Friday afternoon before a long 
weekend, Central Bank (CB) Governor Jose Lois Malkun 
announced that arrest warrants had been issued for former 
executives of the Banco Nacional de Credito, wound up 
recently by the banking authorities.  Former Bancredito 
President Manuel Arturo Pellerano Pena and Vice President 
Juan Felipe Mendoza were wanted for fraud and violations of 
the Monetary and Finance Law.  CB lawyers filed a complaint 
accusing them of responsibility for illegal, unfunded loans 
amounting to RD pesos 20 billion (USD 538 million). 
 
(SBU) Superintendent of Banks Julio Cross Frias told the 
Ambassador that day that Bancredito had kept two sets of 
books, similar to the dual sets kept by spectacularly failed 
Baninter, and had used them for loans to its own affiliated 
companies Internet service provider Tricom, cable company 
Telecable and various others. 
 
(U) The press reported a failed attempt to arrest the bankers 
on November 7, (neither was at work, although it looked as if 
they had cleared out moments before arrival of the 
constables).  Action was suspended over a holiday weekend and 
on Saturday President Mejia told the District Attorney to 
delay until the executive branch could study the case. 
 
(U) On November 11, the DA formally suspended the arrest 
warrants.  The DA and, later, Supreme Court Chief Justice 
Jorge Subero Isa confirmed that President Mejia was within 
his executive prerogatives, since the case had not yet been 
submitted to the court system.  President Mejia, meanwhile, 
departed for the Ibero-American Summit without further 
comment. 
 
(SBU) Only on November 15, after meeting with the Ambassador, 
did Attorney General Cespedes offer the press on 
administration comment, assuring them that the investigation 
of Bancredito remained active. 
 
(C) Banking Superintendent Julio Cross has been quoted in the 
press criticizing the President and the Attorney General for 
their deferential treatment of bank officials accused of 
corruption.  Cross said that the fraud technique at 
Bancredito mirrored that used at Baninter but was on a 
smaller scale. 
 
(C)  In a meeting with the Ambassador on November 13, Cross 
said he \"thinks and hopes\" that the warrants will be issued, 
but he is not sure when that will be. 
 
(U) On November 19 the Supreme Court announced procedural 
decisions advancing implementation of penal procedure 
previously programmed for 2004 (septel to follow) and the 
Attorney General gave complementary instructions to district 
attorneys.  Suspects now will be guaranteed the right to 
legal counsel during questioning and any arrest must be 
authorized by a judge.  If these measures had been in effect 
ten days earlier, the awkward Bancredito sequence would not 
have occurred.  The arrest would have been on judicial 
authorization and would have gone forward. 
 
TROUBLED WATERS 
 
(C) We understand that the President was caught unawares by 
the Central Bank\'s initiative against Bancredito.  The 
Pelleranos are an old-line family with a distinguished record 
of achievement; they may have assumed, at least initially, 
that banking practice here would permit extensive loans to 
family-owned companies.  We understand that the Pelleranos 
formally pledged their assets against the shortfalls 
initially discovered at the bank; only after due diligence 
revealed the immensity of the shortfall did Central Bank 
lawyers move against them. 
 
(C) The press was initially indignant about President Mejia\'s 
intervention but appears to have settled into a \"wait and 
see\" attitude.  Attorney General Cespedes assured the 
Ambassador that the investigation is continuing, so we are 
taking the same approach: concern and watchful waiting to see 
how the case will be prosecuted. 
 
SENSITIVITIES 
 
(SBU) The Central Bank\'s earlier bailout of the insolvent, 
and now liquidated, Baninter, contributed directly to 
financial anxiety and accelerated the depreciation of the 
peso.  The Central Bank felt betrayed then because it had 
made loans to Baninter as bank officials were shoveling money 
out the door and out of the country.  As for this new case 
with Bancredito, however, its purchase by the Leon Jimenez 
Group will ensure that the bank stays open. 
 
(SBU) Confidence in the Dominican judicial process remains 
very low.  The public assumes that the accused in both cases 
will go either unprosecuted or unpunished.  Lawyers for 
\"Ramoncito\" Baez Figueroa of Baninter told the press on 
November 17 that they would be petitioning for his release, 
\"just as with the officials of Bancredito.\"  With the 
November 18 reforms they formally requested a review of the 
detention order against him. 
 
MESSAGE: FRAUD HURTS EVERYONE 
 
(SBU) Embassy Santo Domingo is working at all levels to 
encourage full investigation and prosecution of bank fraud. 
We are engaging government officials, civil society, business 
leaders and others with the message that banking fraud was a 
major factor in the nation\'s financial plight and has hurt 
everyone in the Republic.  We continue to urge prosecution of 
complex fraud cases.  During his visit on November 21-22, 
Treasury Under Secretary John Taylor further reinforced this 
effort. 
 
(end text). 
 
2.  (U) Drafted by Angela Kerwin. 
HERTELL 
"
"12410","11/26/2003 20:51","03SANTODOMINGO6871","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 006871 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN TREASURY CONCERN ABOUT IMF NEGOTIATIONS, 
POSSIBLE ACTION AGAINST EXCHANGE SPECULATORS 
 
REF: KUBISKE & MEIGS E-MAILS/WHA-WHA/CAR-TREASURY-EB 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary.  Dominican Technical Secretary of the 
Presidency Carlos Despradel says that President Mejia and his 
team are close to an agreement with the IMF but are concerned 
that speculation in the foreign exchange market may be 
undermining all calculations.  Strong action against 
speculators is possible.  End summary. 
 
2.  (U)  DCM and EcoPol Counselor were invited to meet 
Technical Secretary of the Presidency Carlos Despradel on 
November 26 for a read-out of talks with the IMF, as a 
follow-up to the visit of Treasury Under Secretary John 
Taylor.  Emboffs were received by technical advisor Luis 
Reyes Santos, who mentioned that IMF team leader Figuerola 
and IMF resrep Mandeng were both in flight to Washington for 
Thanksgiving holiday.  One fiscal specialist, Geremia 
Palomba, is still in Santo Domingo but was out of contact. 
 
3.  (SBU) Technical Secretary Despradel arrived ten minutes 
later, directly from a meeting with President Mejia.  He 
provided a chart of the IMF negotiations as of November 24 
and November 25: 
 
PROGRAM AS OF NOVEMBER 24:          Percent of GDP 
 
1.  Central Bank quasi-fiscal deficit                 - 4.0 
 
2. Electricity Sector 
   includes rate increases averaging 42 percent 
   (1% monthly adjustments for consumers of 
    less than 300 kw, 4% monthly adj for consumers 
    of 300-700 kw, elimination of subsidies for 
    all consuming more than 700 kw0); total 
    of subsidies is 0.8 percent GDP 
   -1.0 
- - - - - - 
 
SUBTOTAL DEFICIT (1   2)                                    - 
5.0 
 
GOVERNMENT SURPLUS, including 
  Measures to reduce expenditures by 
  a further 1.1 percent of GDP; includes 
  the projected  yield of the 5% export tax 
  0.5 
- - - - - 
GLOBAL DEFICIT 
    - 4.5 percent 
 
GAP requiring financing, according to IMF                 1.0 
percent 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
AS OF NOVEMBER 25 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
Proposed additional measures 
1.    Further spending cuts  (0.4 percent) 
2.    New taxes (0.6 percent) 
1.0   percent 
 
4.  (SBU)  Despradel stressed that adding further taxes would 
be a very difficult undertaking and could well delay approval 
of the 2004 budget beyond the December timeframe.  President 
Mejia has told advisors that he is determined to reach 
agreement with the Fund and says that he will persuade 
congress and other interests of the need to enact them. 
Despradel said that one approach might be raising the VAT 
from 12 percent currently to 14 or 15 percent, with 
exceptions for basic necessities. 
 
5.  (U) Note.  President of the Business Council (CONEP) 
Elena Viyella has emphasized to us in recent days that 
businesses find unacceptable the draft for the 5 percent tax 
on exports.  In the version approved by the Senate there is 
no legal mechanism specified for collecting the tax.  CONEP 
believes that the law should to some extent mirror the 
mechanisms and rates embodied in the private sector voluntary 
agreements made with the administration since October.  She 
notes that the export tax doesn,t address Free Zone exports 
and is not adequate in dealing with the dollar earnings of 
the hotel sector. 
 
Central Bank debt - Request to USG 
 
 6. (SBU) Despradel stressed the deep concern of the 
financial team about the short-term debt held by the Central 
Bank (CB) in the form of certificates of deposit (largely 
originating as guarantees of Baninter deposits).  He 
estimates this stock at 60 billion pesos currently.   At an 
annualized interest rate of 30 percent, the CB will have to 
issue further certificates regularly to offset the liquidity 
created by interest payments.  The program projects the 
resulting stock of CB debt at 65 billion in March 2004, 76 
billion in June, 84 billion in September, and 81 billion 
(sic)  in December.  Despradel supposes that in unchanged 
circumstances the debt would rise from 81 billion to 100 
billion in 2005.  He finds unrealistic the IMF suggestion to 
raise taxes further so as to offset this growth in debt. 
 
7.(U)  Note.  Banks are growing increasingly reluctant to 
roll over the government,s short term debt.  The most recent 
offering was of 7.5 billion pesos -- and only 4.8 billion was 
placed at an average maturity of 19.1 days.  None of the CB 
offerings over the past ten weeks has been fully subscribed. 
 
8.  (SBU) Despradel and staff are preparing a letter to the 
USG through U/S Taylor requesting help in obtaining a large 
sum of financing so as to reduce the stock of CB certificates 
and lower payments.  They want to restructure the debt into 
long-term obligations, perhaps in dollars, and to lower the 
rate. 
 
(SBU) Rumors, liquidity, exchange rate -- arrests? 
 
9.  (SBU) Despradel said the President,s meeting that 
morning had been scheduled to examine the possible elements 
of expenditure cuts and new taxes. Participants had 
concentrated instead on the upsurge in rumors and pressure 
related to the exchange rate. \"Very strong\" rumors assert 
that further banks are in trouble (to our understanding, this 
view is erroneous).  The peso is trading currently at about 
45 to the dollar, up from about 41 earlier this week. 
Despradel said that the administration believes that there is 
a deliberate effort to instill panic so as to drive the 
exchange rate yet higher.  Well-respected business persons 
are asking for government action, and \"the President thinks 
that something must be done.\" 
 
10.  (SBU) Despradel said that there is a strong possibility 
that the government will take action against exchange houses 
and individuals thought to be engaged in this effort.  The 
administration might make high profile raids for tax 
inspections or might ask for arrest warrants.  Despradel says 
that he himself is very moderate on these questions and knows 
that the effect might be negative -- but the policymakers are 
tending to the view that market manipulation must be stopped, 
to prevent the rate from hitting 50 to the dollar.  &This is 
a very delicate moment.8 
 
11.  (SBU) Note.  The IMF team suggested that the GODR could 
go onto the market to purchase dollars for international 
payments of US $ 150-200 million due from now until the end 
of calendar year 2003.  This would place additional demand on 
the exchange market. 
 
12.  (U) Despradel stressed that the IMF negotiations have 
been premised on an exchange rate of about 40 pesos to the 
dollar.  Further depreciation of the currency would mean 
complete redrawing of the program. 
 
Request: Fund flexibility 
 
13. (SBU)  Despradel does not believe it is possible to make 
any public statement about the status of the negotiations 
with the fund.  He asks that the USG seek to convince the 
Fund negotiators to be more flexible.  He understands their 
institutional interest in staying tough but is concerned that 
&this approach could destroy the country.\" 
 
14.  (U)  Expenditures.  The Technical Secretary provided in 
tabular form a summary of government expenditures for 1995 
(14.3 percent of GDP in Balaguer,s last year), 1999 (16.2 
percent of GDP in Fernandez,s last year) and 2003 (15.1 
percent), as a defense against assertions of lavish spending 
by the Mejia administration. 
 
15. (SBU)  Further IFI loans.  Despradel says that the 
InterAmerican Development Bank is planning a fast disbursing 
loan of US $ 200 million, with $150 million in the first 
tranche.  The World Bank is planning a Structural Adjustment 
Loan of US $80 million (Despradel will ask for US $100 
million) \"to keep the lights on.\"  Of this, about US $70 
million would be used for energy.  The loan,s conditions 
will require maintaining levels of social expenditures. 
 
KUBISKE 
"
"12425","11/28/2003 12:49","03SANTODOMINGO6875","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE319878","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006875 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR A/RPS/IPS/CR 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: AINF, SNAR, PREL, CO 
SUBJECT: FREEDOM OF INFORMATION REQUEST NO. 200301573 
         REQUESTOR: MANNIN, GEORGE J 
 
REF: STATE 319878 
 
1. Post regrets the delay in fulfilling the request as 
stated in Reftel, but finds the request as worded, \"for all 
documents related to the Ambassador since his arrival at 
post\", too broad in scope. 
 
2. Please provide clarification in a more specific and/or 
defined scope for this request. 
 
KUBISKE 
"
"12436","11/28/2003 20:19","03SANTODOMINGO6906","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE301352","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 006906 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/CT (REAP) AND WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: 2003 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 301352 
 
1.  Summary.  There were no terrorist attacks or known 
terrorism related activities in the GODR during calendar year 
2003.  The GODR continues to work closely with the USG in the 
fight on global terrorism.  End Summary. 
 
2.  Embassy Santo Domingo submits the following responses 
keyed to reftel requests. 
 
A)  Significant actions taken by the host governments to 
support the global coalition against terrorism, particularly 
law enforcement actions taken against Al-Qaida operatives, 
but including diplomatic efforts and actions to block 
terrorist assets, enact new counterterrorism laws, and ratify 
existing treaties. 
 
-- The GODR\'s most significant support to the global 
coalition against terrorism came with the deployment of 
Dominican troops to Iraq.  As a member of the coalition of 
the willing, the GODR sent 302 soldiers to Iraq in August as 
a part of a Spanish led brigade.  The GODR has made a one 
year commitment to keeping its troops in Iraq.  The Dominican 
soldiers currently in Iraq are scheduled to return to the 
Dominican Republic in February and be replaced by a similar 
number of troops for the remainder of the one year commitment. 
 
-- In hosting the 14th Pan American Games, the GODR gained 
first hand knowledge of counterterrorism methods employed to 
secure venues susceptible to international terrorist attacks. 
 This heightened the level of awareness of the threat of 
international terrorism to both the Dominican government and 
the Dominican people. 
 
-- No Al-Qaida operatives have been located within the 
Dominican Republic; therefore, no domestic law enforcement 
actions have been taken against them.  The GODR cooperated 
fully with Embassy Santo Domingo while arresting and 
deporting an individual believed to have ties to 
international terrorism. 
 
-- The GODR has fully cooperated with US and UN requests to 
search their banks for assets held under the names of known 
terrorists.  No accounts of this type have been found.  The 
Superintendent of Banks has been cooperative in heading the 
GODR\'s effort to ensure that banks searches are conducted in 
a timely manner. 
 
-- The GODR has not enacted comprehensive anti-terrorism 
legislation.  The GODR Armed Forces are in the process of 
developing a draft counterterrorism bill.  The bill is 
expected to be introduced to the Senate or Chamber of 
Deputies in 2004. 
 
B) Describe the response of the judicial system of each 
country to acts of international terrorism and/or significant 
acts of domestic terrorism during 2003, including any host 
government prosecutions relating to terrorism.  Particular 
attention should be given to host government actions 
regarding acts of terrorism against or affecting U.S. 
citizens or facilities. 
 
-- There are no pending cases relating to terrorism in the 
judicial system in the Dominican Republic, nor have there 
been any terrorism related prosecutions during 2003. 
 
C)  Did the host government extradite or request the 
extradition of suspected terrorists for prosecution during 
the year?  Particular attention should be given to host 
government responses to U.S. requests for extradition or 
assistance in terrorist cases. 
 
-- The GODR did not extradite nor request the extradition of 
any suspected terrorists during CY03.  In general, the USG 
and GODR have very good relations on extradition matters.  So 
far this year, the GODR has extradited eight fugitives to the 
US.  The US has returned one fugitive to the Dominican 
Republic.  The GODR has worked with the USG to build cells to 
hold 45 prisoners awaiting extradition.  Additionally, the 
GODR has promised to increase resources in its extradition 
unit within the Attorney General\'s office. 
 
D)  Describe any significant impediments to host government 
prosecution and/or extradition of suspected terrorists. 
 
-- There is no comprehensive anti-terrorism law in the 
Dominican Republic.  Any prosecution would have to take place 
under existing criminal statutes.  The existing criminal code 
is fairly comprehensive and includes statutes covering many 
terrorism-related crimes such as money laundering, crimes 
against persons, crimes against property, homicide (all 
degrees), and human rights abuses.  The judicial system will 
formally adopt a new criminal procedure code in January 2004. 
 Some portions of the code have gone into effect this year. 
The new procedural code moves the GODR away from a strict 
Napoleonic Code-based criminal procedural system, towards an 
accusatory system. 
 
-- The 1909 extradition treaty between the USG and the GODR 
does not list \"terrorism\" as an extraditable crime. 
Nevertheless, the treaty contains a comprehensive list of 
crimes under which a request for extradition could be made. 
Additionally, the GODR has honored extradition requests for 
crimes not specifically enumerated in the treaty.  For 
instance, fugitives accused of certain drug related crimes 
have been extradited under the authority of other 
international treaties to which both countries are parties. 
 
-- The USG and the GODR have a high level of cooperation on 
extradition matters. 
E)  Discuss host government responses other than prosecution. 
 These would include, but are not limited to, public 
statements by government officials or official news agencies 
following a terrorist incident (in or outside the country) 
and efforts by host government to investigate terrorist 
incidents or to assist with international terrorism 
investigations. 
 
-- The GODR willingly assists USG agencies in international 
terrorism investigations and international law enforcement 
matters in general.   Hosting the 14th Pan American Games 
this year provided a unique opportunity for the GODR to raise 
the country\'s level of awareness to the possibility of 
international terrorism.  GODR security force members, both 
military and police, were quoted as saying the GODR was 
prepared for potential terrorist attacks on its soil. (See 
paragraph F, below) 
 
F) Describe major counterterrorism efforts undertaken in 2003 
by the host government, including steps taken in 
international fora. 
 
-- The GODR\'s troops currently stationed in Iraq received 
counterterrorism training prior to deployment.  A second 
group of soldiers, scheduled to be deployed in February 2004, 
will begin their counterterrorism training in 2003 and finish 
it in 2004.  These sessions are the first counterterrorism 
training received by any GODR military or police troops. 
 
-- Embassy\'s Narcotics Affairs Section (NAS) sponsored a 
number of training programs with counterterrorism components. 
 A group of airport security officers went to Miami to 
receive dogs and canine handlers training.  The training 
focused on the detection of explosive devices.  This unit is 
now operating at Las Americas airport in the Dominican 
Republic.  Additionally, NAS, in conjunction with the 
Department of Justice, sponsored two money laundering 
workshops for prosecutors and law enforcement officers. 
 
-- A small number of military and police officers received 
counterterrorism training and guidance from the USG and 
Israel, prior to the opening of the 14th Pan Am Games in 
Santo Domingo.  The Pan Am Games brought more than 1600 
athletes, trainers and support personnel from western 
hemisphere countries to participate in an Olympic style 
competition over two weeks.  The GODR stated it was in a 
position to handle an international terrorist attack, but 
security throughout the games showed numerous deficiencies. 
Military forces with security responsibilities were not 
appropriately trained or equipped.  Access controls to 
athletic event venues were lax and the physical design and 
structures for the venues failed to provide adequate security 
controls.  There were no serious security breaches or attacks 
during the games. 
 
G) Describe any significant host government support for 
international terrorism, terrorists, or terrorist groups, 
including (but not limited to) political and financial 
support or terrorists or their activities; diplomatic support 
through diplomatic recognition; misuse of the diplomatic 
pouch and other diplomatic privileges to support terrorism; 
provision of sanctuary and/or the presence of offices or 
terrorist groups; provision of training or training sites; 
provision of weapons; and positions taken on terrorism issues 
in international fora. 
 
-- The GODR has not shown any support for international 
terrorism, terrorists or terrorist groups.  The widespread 
acceptance of bribes or favors by officials and security 
forces could leave the Dominican Republic susceptible to 
exploitation by terrorist organizations.  Relatively high 
level government officials and at least one prominent 
congressional representative have been implicated in alien 
smuggling operations and have been tied to other illicit 
activities.  Embassy Santo Domingo is vigilant in efforts to 
detect and report individuals of responsibility engaged in 
suspicious activities. 
 
H) Has the host government made any public statements in 
support of a terrorist-supporting country on a terrorism 
issue? (The seven governments designated as state sponsors of 
terrorism are Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Syria, 
and Sudan.  Please note that, although Iraq remains a 
designated state sponsor, all applicable sanctions have been 
suspended.) 
 
-- The GODR has not made any public statements in support of 
a terrorist-supporting country on a terrorism issue. 
 
I) Describe any significant change since 2002, positive or 
negative, in the host government\'s attitude toward terrorism, 
international or domestic.  What is responsible for the 
change? 
-- Overall there has been a positive change in the GODR\'s 
attitude toward combating terrorism during 2003.  The 
government has engaged with the deployment of troops to Iraq 
and with its hosting of the Pan Am Games, gaining a better 
understanding of terrorist threats in both international and 
domestic arenas.  GODR and USG officials have further 
improved screening and reviewing suspect third country 
nationals in the Dominican Republic.  The Foreign Ministry 
has worked with Embassy\'s Consular Fraud Prevention Unit in 
reviewing suspect visa applications and detecting fraud. 
KUBISKE 
"
"12437","11/28/2003 21:23","03SANTODOMINGO6907","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE290725","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 006907 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/26/2013 
TAGS: MARR, MASS, PREL 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC ARTICLE 98 AGREEMENT 
 
REF: STATE 290725 
 
(U) Classified by CDA Lisa Kubiske for reason 1.5 (b/d). 
 
1. (C)  MFA Legal Adviser Jorge Santiago is waiting for 
comments on the Article 98 agreement from other government 
branches. 
 
2. (C) Ambassador, in conversations with President Mejia on 
November 22 and 24, stressed the urgency of the Dominican 
Republic\'s ratifying its signed ICC Article 98 bilateral 
agreement with the United States.  DCM Kubiske emphasized the 
same message during a courtesy call by Cesar Matias, 
chairperson of the Dominican Senate\'s External Relations 
Committee, on November 20.  DCM also raised the issue during 
the Ambassador\'s lunch for legislative leaders, including the 
presidents of the Senate and Chamber of Deputies, for 
Treasury U/S Taylor on November 22.  Senate President Vasquez 
indicated willingness to move the measure forward once it is 
received from the Ministry. 
 
3. (C) Deputy Secretary of Foreign Relations Miguel Pichardo 
responded to presentation on November 28 by EcoPol counselor 
with an offer to have the MFA legal office advise the Embassy 
of the appropriate points of contact for other GODR agencies 
in this consultative process.  Pichardo will provide this 
information next week and emboffs will stress to those 
interlocutors the policy importance of the Article 98 
agreement. 
KUBISKE 
"
"12457","12/1/2003 22:26","03SANTODOMINGO6931","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 006931 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL; NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB; TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/29/2008 
TAGS: PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION SERIES #4 -- RE-ELECTIONISM 
 
 
Classified By: DCM LISA KUBISKE.  REASON: 1.5 (B/D). 
 
1.  (SBU) Following is the fourth in our series on the 
Dominican presidential election: 
 
RE-ELECTIONISM 
 
(U) Why does Dominican President Hipolito Mejia continue to 
drive toward re-election, in the face of increasingly vocal 
dissent?  The business sector and politicans are deeply 
worried about government finances and the possibility of 
runaway inflation.  Many Dominicans are seeking irrationally 
for a \"magic bullet\" against the financial crisis; some think 
that all will be well once again if only Mejia will face the 
facts and renounce his attempt at re-election. 
 
(SBU) The deeply personalistic nature of Dominincan politics 
encourages this simplistic view.  In fact, the crisis is 
systemic, rooted in the casual dealings, influence peddling 
and corruption of Dominican institutions.  Mejia is a winner 
in this environment and has shown great ability to get along. 
 Although he bears some responsibility for the financial 
crisis (because of the administration\'s decision to guarantee 
all -- repeat all -- the deposits in the failed Baninter), 
Mejia\'s early departure from the political scene would not 
solve the economic problem.  Just the opposite: he would 
forfeit all credibility in the tough dealings needed to meet 
the conditions for the IMF agreement.  To get that standby, 
this President needs to deliver in very short order a 2004 
budget which will include additional further taxes to 
increase revenue by about 0.6 percent of GDP.  That probably 
means obliging a nervous Congress to raise the value-added 
tax (VAT) for 2004 from 12 percent to 14 or 15 percent, a 
measure which must be voted by late December as part of the 
next budget. 
 
(SBU) Mejia is already walking a fine line between courting 
political support and accepting budget reality.  Perhaps to 
make the medicine of the coming austerity go down more 
smoothly, he just boosted hopes concerning medicine prices by 
issuing a decree exempting from import taxes the inputs and 
capital goods for the pharmaceutical industry, and he 
exempted books and magazines entirely from the VAT.  This 
week he publicly fudged comments on the IMF terms (\"I will 
not sign any agreement which raises electricity rates\" -- 
this at a time when his economic team is proposing monthly 
price adjustments, scaled according to consumption).  At the 
same time, he has reaffirmed privately to us his intention to 
sign an agreement with the IMF that includes both sharp 
spending cuts and tax increases. 
 
Voices against Re-election 
 
(C) Supreme Court President Jorge Subero Isa told an emboff 
in early November that pressure against Mejia\'s re-election 
effort was growing.  Respected intellectual Hugo Tolentino 
Dipp -- the former foreign minister who resigned over his 
disagreement with Mejia about sending Dominican troops to 
Iraq -- is among the notables talking against re-electionism. 
 He gave his \"valued friend\" Hipolito Mejia a good hard shove 
in that direction on November 13, publishing an elegantly 
worded, hard-hitting \"Public Letter to the Honorable Hipolito 
Mejia, President of the Dominican Republic\" in the 
government-owned daily Listin Diario. 
 
(U) Among Tolentino,s  grave, courtly  comments: 
 
\"Can it perhaps be true that the fascination with the power 
to command, with the delight of seeing the obedience of the 
governed, and the vanity induced by ceremony and deference, 
have managed to bring the long-time PRD stalwart Hipolito 
Mejia to betray one of the most democratic traditions of the 
Dominican people and of the PRD?  I do not wish to believe 
it, despite the heavy doubts that weigh on my understanding 
and despite the strictly personal arguments of justification 
you used when casting yourself forward from the seat of power 
into a re-election effort.  In your justification, Mr. 
President, there was not a single consideration, not even an 
inappropriate one, which could be interpreted as addressing a 
national interest.\" 
 
 and 
 
\"The tradition of continual presidential re-election - - 
\'continuism\' - - has been a heavy burden for the Dominican 
people, Mr. President.  Do not go along that road believing 
you will be the exceptional man who will justify yourself and 
overcome the severe damage that \'re-electionism\'  has 
inflicted on the Dominican Republic.  Vehement ambition 
followed in pursuit of remaining in power has always been 
linked with the deliberate frustration of popular will.  And 
this is even more so, for when dealing with elections in 
which the President of the Republic is a candidate, our 
institutions lack the necessary independence and sufficient 
moral stature to guarantee complete transparency of the 
results.  Refusing to recognize this reality, our 
\'re-electionists\' have marked their futures with the stigma 
of illegitimacy and even of despotism.\" 
 
(SBU) Tolentino Dipp does not speak for any particular 
faction of the PRD, but his lofty exposition of the PRD\'s 
traditional opposition to presidential re-election has all 
the more resonance for that. 
 
(U) The Catholic Church, a traditionally influential voice in 
civil society, has felt called upon to express its concern at 
a time of perceived national crisis.  On November 26, the 
Conference of Dominican Bishops, comprising 19 prelates 
headed by Archbishop Nicolas de Jesus Lopez Rodriguez, 
asserted in a document demanding reforms to deal with the 
crisis, \"There are those who believe that the renunciation by 
the honorable President of his candidacy for re-election 
would highly favor social peace, confidence, and 
governability.  We leave this to his conscience.\"  To their 
credit, the bishops also called for called for cuts in public 
spending, removal of corrupt government officials, and public 
and private efforts to restore business confidence. 
 
(U) Two Protestant evangelical organizations also recommended 
this past week that the President \"examine his conscience\" on 
the issue. 
 
(U) Elena Viyella, president of the National Council of 
Private Enterprise, has consistently characterized the 
President\'s re-election effort as a source of uncertainty and 
concern for the private sector.  Marisol Vicens, the lawyer 
who heads the National Young Entrepreneurs Association, is 
unambiguous in urging the President not to run. 
 
A PPH vision 
 
(C) President Mejia is playing a forceful, calculated 
re-election game. On November 22 he opened a new headquarters 
for his PRD/PPH (Proyecto Presidencial Hipolito), and on 
November 30 he officially registered his candidacy for 
nomination at a party convention December 14.  To a question 
about his re-election bid, he shot back, \"Stop asking me 
that.  No way I\'m going to withdraw.\"  PRD insiders tell us 
that his campaign is basing its approach on the results of 
privately commissioned polls showing he can take 58 percent 
of the votes in the PRD convention.  These players believe 
that PRD President Hatuey Descamps can gather less than 10 
percent of party support for his rival convention on December 
7 intended to reject re-electionism.  The mid-levels of the 
national PRD machine -- including mayors, city councils, and 
legislators who have benefited from Mejia\'s public works 
projects and other government spending -- provide a still 
considerable base of support.  Looking further out, Mejia 
loyalists think that the President has a good prospect of 
besting Leonel Fernandez (PLD) in a second round on June 30, 
in part by attracting voters who will have supported 
Reformista (PRSC) candidate Eduardo Estrella in the first 
round May 16.  Working on those assumptions, the PPH is not 
paying much attention to the anti-re-electionistas. 
 
The Burden of History 
 
(U) Mejia\'s critics oppose his re-election not only because 
of their objections to his policies, but because of the 
Dominican Republic\'s history of manipulated voting in 
presidential elections.  The late strongman Joaquin Balaguer, 
operating in a formally democratic political system, 
accumulated 22 years in power through repeated use of 
military intervention, violence, press restrictions and fraud 
during elections.  International and domestic outrage forced 
him to step down in the face of an overwhelming opposition 
victory (in 1978) and to accept an abbreviated term and a 
constitutional change prohibiting re-election (in 1994). 
Mejia used his control of Congress to abolish the 
constitutional ban in 2002. 
 
(end text) 
 
2.  (U) Drafters:  Michael Meigs, Bainbridge Cowell 
HERTELL 
"
"12486","12/2/2003 23:11","03SANTODOMINGO6952","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SANTODOMINGO6582","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 SANTO DOMINGO 006952 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FROM AMBASSADOR FOR WHA ASSISTANT SECRETARY NORIEGA; DEPT 
FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/PPC, WHA/EPSC, EB S DONNELLY, EB/OMA R 
FRISBEE; DEPT PASS USAID/LAC, USTR; NSC FOR SHANNON, H 
CRUZ; TREASURY FOR U/S TAYLOR, N LEE, R TOLOUI, L LAMONICA; 
SECDEF FOR OSD; JUSTICE FOR OIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, EAID, EFIN, PHUM, MARR, DR 
SUBJECT: WORKPLAN FOR DOMINICAN REPUBLIC - HOW THE UNITED 
STATES CAN PURSUE ITS GOALS 
 
REF: A) SANTO DOMINGO 6582 B) E-MAIL FROM ASSISTANT 
 
     SECRETARY NORIEGA 
 
1. (SBU) At your request in response to my thoughts reftel, I 
am providing to you in this message my suggestions for a 
calendar-based plan for U.S. Government actions to exert a 
positive influence on the economic and political situation in 
the Dominican Republic.  I was heartened by Washington\'s 
rapid response to my earlier message, particularly to the 
very productive visit of a delegation headed by Treasury 
Under Secretary John Taylor and including a representative of 
the National Security Council. 
 
2. (SBU) The fundamental problem and challenge in the 
Dominican Republic is the weakness of its institutions.  The 
Dominican public still believes that most of their public 
officials are motivated by greed and self-interest.  Those 
with influence and money continue to consider themselves 
above the law.  This deep, historically rooted hopelessness 
is at the heart of our most pressing challenges -- seeing 
that the presidential elections deliver the democratic choice 
of the country, and securing prosecution and conviction of 
the criminals whose large-scale banking fraud sank the 
country\'s finances.  Unless institutions can be made to 
function, the ordinary Dominicans will lose faith in 
democracy and will have little hope of sharing the benefits 
of growth, globalization and free trade. 
 
3.  (U) Dominicans have immense respect for the United States 
and for its government.  Senior U.S. officials visiting Santo 
Domingo can have a great impact, successfully pushing 
Dominicans away from their worst demons.  I make several 
suggestions below for visits.  In particular, I believe it\'s 
important for you to come here and speak in favor of a clean 
democratic electoral process, good governance, and aggressive 
enforcement of the law.  In addition, I consider it very 
important that we find funds of about $200,000 for 
international observers for the May 2004 presidential 
elections.  These two key steps would help the Embassy ensure 
that the next administration (whoever wins) begins its term 
with credibility and public support. 
 
4.  (SBU) This embassy\'s goals and work plan has long 
emphasized institution building.  The dramatic Baninter 
banking fraud and its consequences, both economic and 
political, brought an immediate need for technical assistance 
aimed at improving financial supervision, financial 
investigation, and judicial prosecution.  To confront these 
problems properly now, I ask for at least $350,000 for 
technical assistance. 
 
5.  (SBU) Cooperation in peace keeping and international law 
enforcement can benefit  Dominicans directly and can help 
shape their beliefs about their domestic institutions.  I ask 
for closer cooperation with the Dominican military, as well 
as assistance to improve their skills, capabilities, and 
professionalism.  I will continue to press for prosecution of 
those who traffic persons and welcome Washington visitors to 
stress that message.  I believe there can be great mutual 
benefits from establishing closer cooperation with the 
Department of Homeland Security, particularly by creating a 
permanent DHS position at this Embassy. 
 
6.  (SBU) International trade in goods and services will be 
the basis for sustainable growth in the Dominican Republic. 
Bilateral cooperation over the past year in the Trade and 
Investment Council has prepared both public and private 
sectors for free trade negotiations during the first quarter 
of 2004.  The U.S. messages on the benefits of trade will 
coincide with the presidential campaign.  I welcome the 
prospect of this public debate and expect it to help focus 
Dominican public opinion on the promises of the future in 
contrast to the failures of the past. 
 
7. (SBU)  Following is the detailed proposed action plan 
containing these and other requests for the period between 
now and the next Dominican administration.  This plan has the 
support of the entire Country Team. 
 
NOW IN COURSE -- EXPANSION POSSIBLE 
 
FINANCES 
 
- - Finances/Tax Reform.  Urge GODR, leading political 
parties and private sector to find consensus on immediate tax 
changes in order to qualify for IMF standby; urge the need to 
close standby negotiations and deliver on pre-conditions; 
urge all concerned to initiate consultations elements of a 
tax reform program.  (Note: USAID is already engaged with the 
GODR in fiscal policy reform and stands ready to support the 
process of identifying an integrated reform package in 2004 
if USD 100,000 in additional funds are available.) 
 
- - Assistance: Central Bank debt.  USAID is currently 
assisting Central Bank in defining methods and approaches to 
converting USD 1.5 billion in short-term debt instruments 
into longer term instruments with lower interest rates.  The 
Central Bank needs to develop a comprehensive strategy to 
develop appropriate markets and instruments.  (Further USAID 
involvement in 2004 would require USD 350,000 in additional 
program funds; as an alternative, Treasury could supply this 
technical assistance.)  USAID could provide technical 
assistance in liquidating foreclosed real estate, cleaning up 
titles and enhancing the value of properties so as to realize 
full market value.  (This assistance could be provided in 
2004 with an additional USD 150,000 in resources.) 
 
- - Debt.  USAID has been providing assistance to the 
Ministry of Finance in resolving expropriation claims as a 
means to improve domestic debt management.  This amount could 
be expanded to help the GODR quantify debt, publish results 
and develop a plan to reduce the percentage of GDP devoted to 
debt service.  This would entail creating conditions for 
establishing a secondary market and strengthening financial 
institutions.  This activity could start quickly, but a 
comprehensive program along these lines would require 
additional resources of USD 400,000. 
 
ENERGY 
 
      - - Electricity.  Urge GODR to make payments to 
  generators, including COGENTRIX, so as to reduce scope 
  and frequency of blackouts. 
 
- - Energy sector assistance.  USAID consultants helping 
Dominican National Energy Council and Presidency to define 
short-term and medium-term steps needed to resolve energy 
crisis.  Recommendations will feed into World Bank and IDB 
programs.  (Underway, but follow-up work in 2004 will require 
USD 200,000 in additional funding from USAID Washington.) 
 
- - IDB.  Urge IDB,s senior management to persuade lenders 
to COGENTRIX project to be patient while GODR and COGENTRIX 
renegotiate contract. (Note: GODR paid off all arrears in 
mid-2003 but COGENTRIX did not agree at that time to discuss 
renegotiation; GODR holds that clearing arrears was 
understood to be tied to renegotiation and has refused to 
honor \"take or pay\" provisions since then; new arrears of 
approximately USD 25 million have accumulated.  COGENTRIX, 
under new ownership, may be more open to renegotiation.) 
 
ELECTIONS 
 
- - Elections/USAID.  Work with civil society/democracy NGO 
to recruit qualified poll workers and train 600 local 
election observers (ongoing until election).  (Funds already 
allocated.) 
 
 
* * Now to mid-December: GODR negotiates with IMF on terms 
for a new standby* * 
 
- - - - - 
DECEMBER 
- - - - - 
 
(** Note: December 7 and 14 rival PRD party conventions; 
December 19 closing of legislative session; December 21 
Confirmation of PRD nominee. ** ) 
POLITICS 
 
- - Underway.  December 3-5, Ambassador will host three major 
political parties separately for lunch discussions.  Message: 
1) U.S. impartiality in Dominican political process; 2) need 
for all political actors to support program with IMF;  3) 
need to put national interest above partisan political 
advantage; 4) encourage contenders within parties to settle 
differences; 5) encourage parties to address economic issues 
in responsible manner; 6) emphasize good governance. 
 
HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
- -  Underway.  Dec 8-9.  Assistant U.S. Attorney General for 
Civil Rights will visit.  AAG will deliver messages on 
trafficking in persons and respect for human rights; 
potential for a call on Chief of National Police to emphasize 
need for strict respect for civil rights in election process. 
 
IFIs AND LENDING 
 
- - Proposed.  Energy.  Energy and social sectors Structural 
Adjustment Loan (SAL).  Urge World Bank to design a SAL 
emergency disbursement of USD 100 million as soon as 
possible, once a GODR budget is passed and the IMF standby is 
renewed.  This would provide cash to reduce arrears due to 
generators and to replenish their fuel supplies.  (Note: 
later disbursements under SAL would finance restructuring and 
would probably not occur until after the May presidential 
elections.) 
 
- - Proposed.  IDB lending.  Encourage the IDB to accelerate 
the processing of emergency lending for social and energy 
sectors as soon as (1) there is informal GODR agreement with 
IMF on resumption of a program and (2) GODR passes the 
required 2004 budget.  Encourage the GODR to meet the 
conditionality to gain access to these funds as soon as 
possible. 
 
BANK FRAUD AND INSTITUTION BUILDING 
 
- - Underway.  Public statements/speech by Ambassador 
high-level USG official(s), Embassy officers, emphasizing the 
need to bring perpetrators of bank fraud to justice, 
reinforcing the need to resist strong political and special 
interest pressure.  Goal: encourage political will and 
consensus on need to complete prosecution of Baninter and 
other fraud cases, so as to restore faith in judiciary and in 
administration of justice. (This continues into 2004.) 
 
- - Proposed.  USAID Washington identify USD 350,000 in 
resources to provide further assistance in 
institution-building and anti-corruption in context of the 
USD 3 billion in complex financial fraud.   Targeted 
assistance would strengthen capacity of authorities to deal 
with current and any future financial fraud cases.  (This 
assistance continues into 2004.) 
 
- - Proposed.  USAID identify USD 200,000 in additional 
resources for programs to strengthen regulatory entities like 
the Superintendents of Banks, Securities, and Insurance, all 
of which are directly linked to the banking sector.  Goal is 
to strengthen the GODR ability to fight corruption. (This 
continues into 2004.) 
 
- - Ongoing.  Exchange of information among Embassy Santo 
Domingo, Department of Homeland Security (Customs), Treasury, 
DEA, Justice and U.S. Attorney,s Office, Miami on Baninter 
fraud case, asset identification and recovery, and 
examination of sources of funds deposited in Baninter. (This 
continues into 2004.) 
 
- - Proposed.  Security/Fraud.  Department of Homeland 
Security examines feasibility of permanent posting of 
DHS/Customs attache in Santo Domingo. 
 
ELECTIONS 
 
- - Proposed.  Urge the GODR to make a formal invitation to 
the OAS to send election observers. 
 
- - Requested.  Identify appropriate USG funding for election 
observation missions by IFES, NDI so as to ensure clean 
elections.  This is needed to strengthen democracy and to 
raise confidence of the Dominican public in the electoral 
process.  (Note: USAID Santo Domingo has approximately USD 
75,000 programmed for these activities, but this is 
insufficient in fact of the NGOs\' initial cost estimates of 
up to USD 400,000.) 
 
- - Requested.  Department (WHA/PPC, L/M) advise whether 
IFES, NDI can accept private funding and whether 
Embassy/Ambassador can solicit contributions.  Embassy survey 
possible sources of private funding for election observers. 
 
MILITARY 
 
- - Requested.  Determine availability of additional military 
assistance for GODR aimed at demonstrating advantages of 
close cooperation with U.S. military, including in Iraq, 
without making assistance a \"quid pro quo\" for Iraq service. 
Use funds to strengthen current cooperation against smuggling 
and illegal migration, to prepare Dominican military to 
undertake UN peacekeeping missions, to participate in 
intensified regional naval cooperation, and to manage the 
military more professionally. 
 
- - Requested.  Senior DOD official visits Santo Domingo. 
Topics:  1) stress to senior military the appropriate role 
for armed forces during presidential elections, 2) outline 
possibilities of opportunities to participate in peace 
keeping operations, 3) discuss additional military 
assistance, 4) deliver public address to academia or other 
institution on U.S. policy in Iraq and our goals for the 
Iraqi people. 
 
- - - - 
JANUARY 
- - - - 
 
- - Proposed.  Jan 12-13.  OAS Special Summit in Mexico.  Use 
opportunity for President Bush, Secretary Powell, Assistant 
Secretary Noriega to deliver message to President Mejia (if 
 
SIPDIS 
he attends, or at lower level, if not) on need for clean 
elections, continued compliance with IMF program, and need 
for progress in efforts to prevent trafficking in persons. 
 
- - Requested.  Technical Assistance: Aviation.  FAA follow 
up its examination of draft Aviation Security law with visit 
and technical assistance.  (Text submitted to FAA in August, 
2003; ref: Santo Domingo 6409 of November 6.) 
 
- - Tentatively scheduled.  Sr. USG Visit/Trade: USTR. 
Mid-January.  USTR Zoellick and team visit Santo Domingo for 
first round of FTA negotiations.  Public diplomacy 
programming includes opening ceremony with President Mejia; 
address by USTR to joint houses of Congress; on-the-record 
conversation with leading print journalists; extended 
television interview with leading broadcaster. 
 
- - Proposed.  Border Security.  Department of Homeland 
Security proposes stationing in Santo Domingo of permanent 
DHS/Customs attache. 
 
- - Tentative.  Sr. USG Visit/Energy.  (TBD) Energy Secretary 
Abrahams visits Santo Domingo.  Topics:  1) need for good 
regulation and governance in energy sector, 2) role of 
private sector in energy production, 3) energy and the 
environment.  Public diplomacy programming includes luncheon 
address on energy and economic development, on-the-record 
conversation with leading journalists. 
 
- - Tentative.  Elections.  Initial working visit of election 
monitors (IFES, NDI, etc.), assuming funding was found. 
 
- - Planned.  Elections.  In coordination with other donor 
country embassies, Embassy will ask GODR Central Election 
Board to permit expanded and organized diplomatic observation 
of preparations leading up to elections and of election 
procedures on voting days.  Subsequently present detailed 
proposal to Election Board. 
 
- -  Planned.  Elections.  Two Embassy-organized workshops 
for local journalists on how to report on elections and on 
the role of the press in the elections process. 
 
- -  Planned.  Elections.  Initiate regular meetings with the 
Election Board to follow development and to stress the 
importance of clean electoral process.  (Continues through 
elections) 
 
- - - - - 
FEBRUARY 
- - - - - 
 
- - Proposed.  Sr. USG Visit/Institution building. 
(Possibility for Assistant Secretary Noriega).  Topics:  1) 
Importance of democratic process, particularly of free, fair 
and clean presidential election in May, 2) Anti-corruption, 
including 2003 draft treaty, 3) Banking fraud, including U.S. 
support for investigations, 4) Human rights, especially 
trafficking in persons.  Public diplomacy programming would 
include speech to prestigious institution and on-the-record 
conversation with leading journalists. 
 
- - Tentative.  Feb. 9-13 (tentative) FTA negotiations in San 
Juan. 
 
- - Proposed.  Public Diplomacy.  Speeches by Ambassador or 
USG visitor.  Topics:  1) importance of further initiatives 
against trafficking in persons and need for stronger 
enforcement; 2) importance of free, fair and transparent 
electoral process.  (Embassy officers will pursue these 
themes in other public appearances -- ongoing.) 
 
** Feb. 27, Dominican Congress reconvenes.** 
 
- - - - 
MARCH 
- - - - 
 
 
- - Planned.  Elections.  Work with Department\'s Office of 
Congressional Affairs (H) to keep U.S. Congress informed on 
progress of electoral campaign in Dominican Republic. 
 
- - Planned.  Elections.  U.S. speaker or event to highlight 
civic responsibility to vote and need for public 
participation in monitoring elections. 
 
-- Proposed.  Trafficking in Persons.  U.S. Visitor 
emphasizes need for immediate prosecution action against 
senior official involved in trafficking of persons. 
 
- - Tentative.  March 8-12:  FTA negotiations in Washington. 
 
- - Proposed.  Urge World Bank to refine program of lending 
for energy sector restructuring. 
 
- - - - 
APRIL 
- - - - 
 
- - Proposed.  Elections. U.S. speaker event on use and abuse 
of polls, polling methodology. 
 
- - Planned.  Elections.  Training of diplomatic observers by 
USAID-supported pro-democracy NGO. 
 
- - Planned.  Initiation of organized diplomatic observation 
process, to continue through both rounds of elections. 
 
- - - 
MAY 
- - - 
 
- - May 16:  First round of presidential elections in 
Dominican Republic.  International observers support local 
observers in monitoring election. 
 
- - - 
June 
- - - 
 
- - Note: June 30 is provisional date of any second round of 
presidential elections in Dominican Republic. 
(End text) 
HERTELL 
"
"12526","12/4/2003 10:59","03SANTODOMINGO6999","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 006999 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/PPC, WHA/EPSC, EB GREENWOOD, EB/OMA/ 
RFRISBEE; DEPT PASS USAID/LAC, USTR; NSC FOR HCRUZ; 
TREASURY FOR NLEE, RTOLOUI, LLAMONICA; SECDEF FOR OSD; 
JUSTICE FOR OIA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/03/2013 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, ECIN, DR 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT MEJIA SETS UP INVESTIGATION TO GET THE 
DOMINICAN EXCHANGE RATE RIGHT 
 
 
Classified By: DEPUTY CHIEF OF MISSION LKUBISKE.  REASON 1.5 (B&D) 
 
1. (U) Summary.  In a December 2 meeting, President Mejia 
insisted that the exchange rate must go down sharply and told 
attendees that military and police officers will be watching 
exchange houses to detect questionable transactions.  Most 
exchange houses have agreed not to sell dollars for more than 
RD40 to dollar.  The Government asserts that it is not 
instigating exchange controls but instead wants the rate to 
return what it should be -- about 30 to the dollar, according 
to some.  So-called voluntary agreements to sell dollars at a 
set rate have regularly been tried in Dominican history, with 
short-lived results.  The use of military and police is new. 
Mejia has reiterated his commitment to reaching agreement 
with the IMF on a revised program.  The Central Bank will 
publish a communique tomorrow (see final para below), 
stressing its aim of deterring criminal behavior.  Ambassador 
and emboffs raised questions on December with a wide range of 
contacts and stressed the impact that the poorly explained 
initiative could have on business confidence and the value of 
the peso.  Exchange trading is routine but thin today, at RD 
40 for the dollar.  Dollars may become even more scarce in 
coming days. End summary. 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
2. (SBU) After the peso broke the RD$40 per dollar barrier 
again in November and continued to weaken, rumors began to 
surface in late November about GODR plans to address the 
crisis.  Receiving increasing complaints about the 
depreciation of the currency, the President publicly blamed 
it on \"manipulation\" by currency trading houses - which 
handle roughly 70 percent of all foreign exchange trading in 
the Dominican Republic -- and issued warnings about possible 
arrests for illegal hoarding of dollars. 
 
A SHOW OF FORCE 
 
3. (C) Immediately following a meeting with his monetary 
board December 2, President Mejia harrangued a large meeting 
of private and public sector representatives on the 
\"unacceptable\" level of the exchange rate, asserting that the 
IMF agreement being revised would become impossible if the 
dollar remained at 45 pesos.  The palace had convened 
exporters, tourism representatives, local bankers and foreign 
exchange traders; Mejia was flanked by administration 
officials, all of the military chiefs, the Governor of the 
Central Bank, and police officials.  He announced the 
formation of a commission to investigate abuses in the 
exchange sector, composed of director of internal taxes 
Teofilo Tabar, Secretary of the Armed Forces General Jose 
Miguel Soto Jimenez, former national police chief under 
Balaguer\'s administration General Rafael Peralta Guerrero, 
and former national police chief during the Fernandez 
administration (and the first year of the Mejia 
administration) General Pedro de Jesus Candelier. We 
understand that a banking superintendency official will also 
participate.  The President\'s tough intent was clear. 
Previous governments have resorted to jawboning and temporary 
pacts on the rate; this is the first time that the military 
and police have been associated with one. Embassy does not 
know whether the President\'s new commission has received any 
charter or written instructions for its work, nor what 
exactly it will do. 
 
4. (C) The Dominican financial team has been examining 
irregularities in the exchange system over the last several 
weeks.  Among concerns which they had notified to Mejia were 
avoidance of taxation by exchange houses, operation of 
unlicensed exchange operations, and some large transactions 
by unknown individuals, in the range of USD 5 to 10 million. 
Banking Superintendent Julio Cross and presidential Technical 
Secretary Carlos Despradel have assured us that these 
 
SIPDIS 
suspicious activities are to be the focus of the 
investigations.  Despradel says that banking Superintendency 
personnel will be sent to at least some of the exchange 
houses to inspect and watch their operations.  The GODR 
denied reports that uniformed military personnel would be 
posted at branches of the four major currency trading houses, 
though it acknowledged having been tasked to identify the 
location of exchange houses.  During an afternoon visit to 
the leading exchange house, Embassy staff saw no military 
presence; Embassy Defense Attache learned from a military 
contact that no order has been issued on the subject. 
5. (C) Bankers and currency traders acceded \"voluntarily\" 
under this pressure to cap the price of the dollar at 40 
pesos.  In the discussions some exchange house 
representatives suggested that dollar purchases be set at 
RD38/1 by December 7 and then reduced progressively by 2 
pesos per week until reaching a level between RD30 to RD32 
per dollar.  Banking Superintendent Cross dismissed this 
scheme, commenting that the proposal was evidence that 
manipulation was already occurring in the markets. 
 
MONETARY BOARD INSIDER 
 
6. (SBU) Monetary Board Member Sonia Guzman (GODR Secretary 
of Industry and Commerce) commented to Econoff December 3 
that the IMF had made its most recent calculation for a new 
standby agreement based on a projected exchange rate of RD40 
per dollar.  She confirmed that Mejia had said in the meeting 
that there was zero chance of signing an agreement if the IMF 
had calculate the rate again due to depreciation.  Guzman 
said that Mejia is committed to reaching agreement with the 
IMF \"no matter what the political costs,\" but that to do so 
the GODR had to bring the exchange rate under control. 
 
7. (C) Guzman said that Mejia was disgusted at the shortfall 
in voluntary contributions provided by exporters and tourism 
operators toward fiscal goals.  When Finance Minister 
Calderon reported contributions at only RD 74 million 
(scarcely more than USD 2 million), far short of projections, 
Mejia was so infutriated that he ordered the Minister to 
return all of the money.  (Guzman said she would approach the 
President to convince him that the GODR should retain at 
least the free trade zone companies\' contributions.) 
 
A \"VOLUNTARY\" RATE 
 
8. (C) Embassy obtained a copy of a circular notice sent out 
by the association of exchange houses on December 2 advising 
members that the meeting had agreed that the rate would not 
exceed RD40, and that \"respect for this measure is 
obligatory.\"  In fact, banks and exchange houses were posting 
rates in this range today -- but volumes were low and some 
houses were refusing to deal at all.  One operator of a 
legitimate exchange house commented that he was not concerned 
at all by the enforcement measures (aimed at questionable 
operations) or by the rate. 
 
EMBASSY INVESTIGATION AND ADVOCACY 
 
9. (SBU) In the course of December 3 Ambassador and Embassy 
officers contacted a wide spectrum of government and private 
sector actors, seeking clarification about these events and 
stressing the importance of preserving the free functioning 
of the exchange markets. Emboffs stressed the need for the 
GODR to make clear its measures and intentions in order to 
prevent the gathering alarm.  Presidential Technical 
Secretary Despradel, in a late afternoon visit to the 
 
SIPDIS 
Embassy, told Ambassador that in response the government had 
thought of issuing a message from the cabinet, but had 
settled on a communique from the Central Bank as more 
appropriate and easier to complete.  He subsequently faxed 
the version to the Embassy.  To be released tomorrow, 
December 4, it emphasizes the GODR adherence to the aim of 
free competition in a properly regulated market and advises 
of the intention to investigation financial irregularities 
such as money laundering.  The communique does not address 
the \"agreed\" rate in the market.  (See informal translation 
below.) 
 
COMMENT 
 
10. (C) Mejia\'s measures were a triumph of political 
grandstanding and a unsustainable approach to the exchange 
market.  A certain amount of clean-up in the sector will do 
everyone some good and could yield tax revenues and fines. 
But the President\'s choice of muscle for the committee was, 
in our opinion, a grave mistake.  The Armed Forces have no 
technical competencies in this area, other than the 
intelligence operations of last week to scout out the 
location of unlicensed exchange houses.  And Mejia\'s 
appointment of Police General Pedro Candelier is a heavy 
handed, empty threat of force.  (NOTE:  Candelier was 
notorious for corruption and for tolerating extrajudicial 
police killings during his tenure as National Police Chief.) 
 
11. (SBU)  Begin text of informal translation of Central Bank 
communique to be released on December 4: 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- 
CENTRAL BANK COMMUNIQUE TO THE NATION 
 
The Central Bank and the Banking Supervision authorities wish 
to inform the public concerning the outcome of the meeting of 
Tuesday, December 2, in the presidential palace chaired by 
the President of the Republic and attended by the monetary, 
fiscal and security authorities as well as representatives of 
the banks, exchange houses and private sectors which earn 
foreign currency. 
 
1.    The reunion of the authorities with the sectors 
participating in the exchange market had as its aim the 
identification of measures to contribute to an environment 
favorable to stabilizing exchange operations and normalizing 
their functioning, in conformity with the laws regulating the 
markets. 
 
In their comments to the press, the principal spokespersons 
of the banks and the exchange houses emphasized the interest 
they share with the authorities in supporting the elimination 
of extra-market factors which prevent the exchange rate from 
corresponding to real values. 
 
2.    Exchange operations are carried out in the Dominican 
Republic in the framework of a free market, with the 
assistance and safeguards of measures in the Monetary and 
Financial Law and the regulations established by the Monetary 
Board.  As occurs with any institutionalized market, its 
functioning is bound up with the privileges of the agents 
participating in the market, which bring with them the duty 
to respect established norms and procedures. 
 
3.    As in any nation of organized institutions, exchange 
operations are supervised by the government authorities and 
are carried out according to norms and formal procedures that 
must be respected by law.  Fundamentally, the market is a 
service offered to its clients by entities that are 
constituted under law according to principles of transparency 
and certified competence. 
 
4.    On the other hand, it should be remembered that the 
Dominican Republic is signatory to a number of international 
agreements and bilateral cooperation agreements which oblige 
the country to remain vigilant and to prosecute crimes 
considered by the international community to be extremely 
serious, including money laundering, whether originated by 
narcotics trafficking, tax evasion, financial fraud, or 
terrorist financing.  These obligations involve 
responsibilities that must be complied with not only to 
protect its own citizens, but also to contribute to the 
security of other nations.  With this aim, the appropriate 
institutions are investigating exchange operations considered 
to be unusual, both for their amounts and because of their 
form -- one of the principal themes discussed in the meeting. 
 
5.    In conclusion, the monetary authorities confirm once 
again their adherence to a system of free exchange and to the 
promotion of competition, by means of which they are 
confident that stability and necessary transparency will be 
re-established in the exchange market, in benefit of all the 
clients of its services, the regular functioning of the 
productive activity of the nation, and the economic security 
of the Dominican people.. 
 
(end text) 
HERTELL 
"
"12582","12/8/2003 11:04","03SANTODOMINGO7095","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 007095 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), L/LEI (W. FUENTES, TAYLOR) 
JUSTICE FOR CRIM/OIA J. MAZUREK AND R. GOLDMAN 
U.S. MARSHAL SERVICE PLEASE PASS TO C. DUDLEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CJAN, KCRM, KFRD, PINR, SNAR, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC EXTRADITES NINE FUGITIVES 
 
 
1.  On December 2, 2003, nine fugitives were extradited from 
the Dominican Republic in the company of U.S. Marshals.  All 
fugitives were flown to San Juan, Puerto Rico.  From there, 
they will be delivered to the jurisdictions which have issued 
warrants for their arrests. 
The following list of fugitives were extradited: 
 
a.  Gustavo Reynoso: wanted to stand trial in the Federal 
District of Massachusetts on narcotics charges. 
 
b.  Francisco Javier Hernandez Meran a/k/a Guillermo Pina: 
escaped from the Regional Prison on Mayaguez, Puerto Rico, 
wanted to serve a sentence imposed for conviction of murder 
and narcotics related offenses. 
 
c.  Edwin Estevez: wanted to stand trial on federal narcotics 
charges in the Southern District of New York. 
 
d.  Rafael Perez Luna: wanted to stand trial on federal 
narcotics charges in the Southern District of New York. 
 
e.  Sixto Perez: wanted to stand trial on a federal narcotics 
offense in the Middle District of Florida. 
 
f.  Marcial Rodriguez Trinidad: wanted to stand trial on 
federal narcotics charges in the District of Puerto Rico. 
 
g.  Francisco Castillo: wanted to serve sentences in two 
narcotics related cases in two counties in the Commonwealth 
of Massachusetts. 
 
h.  Luis Felipe Nunez: wanted to stand trial on federal 
narcotics charges in the Middle District of Florida. 
 
i.  Miguel Ramon DeOleo: wanted to stand trial on federal 
narcotics charges in the Southern District of Texas. 
 
2.  These cases are the ninth through seventeenth 
extraditions by the Dominican Republic in 2003, and the 
forty-fourth through fifty-second under the administration of 
President Mejia. 
HERTELL 
"
"12599","12/8/2003 20:52","03SANTODOMINGO7132","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SANTODOMINGO5759","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 007132 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, PGOV 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTIONS #6: PRD\'S RUMP: HATUEY, 
HATUEY, HE\'S OUR MAN 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 5759 
 
1.  (SBU) Following is the sixth in Embassy Santo Domingo\'s 
presidential election series: 
 
PRD\'S RUMP: HATUEY, HATUEY, HE\'S OUR MAN 
 
Party President Hatuey De Camps was the winner of the rump 
nationwide primary election on December 7 organized by his 
dissident faction of the ruling Dominican Revolutionary Party 
(PRD).  De Camps and two other \"anti-re-electionistas\" ran in 
a field of three candidates.  They had refused to participate 
in the PRD primary scheduled for December 14 in which 
President Mejia will compete for the nomination against three 
other pre-candidates.  The De Camps group vow fidelity to 
their version of the PRD\'s traditional opposition to 
presidential re-election. 
 
The December 7 primary result gives the opinion of a minority 
-- about 19 percent -- of the PRD\'s estimated 1.6 million 
members and an even smaller slice of the electorate.  With 72 
percent of the 3000 voting sites reporting, De Camps won 64 
percent of 302,000 votes counted and Senator Ramon 
Alburquerque and Jose Rafael Abinader each won 18 percent. 
According to the press, some PRD headquarters remained closed 
for the primary, and in those areas the dissidents had to set 
up polls at personal residences or on the street.  Some of 
the sites attracted few voters.  Tropical storm Odette dumped 
heavy rain on the island the night before the vote. 
 
The real PRD event will be the December 14 primary. 
President Mejia faces three challengers -- Vice President 
Milagros Ortiz-Bosch, Secretary of State for Tourism Rafael 
\"Fello\" Subervi, and former PRD president Enmanuel Esquea -- 
who have agreed to pool their votes behind the highest 
vote-getter of the three.   Mejia is still the best bet. 
 
Candidates registered for the December 14 primary have 
petitioned the the National Elections Board (JCE) to set 
aside the decision of the PRD National Executive Committee 
under Hatuey\'s chairmanship authorizing the December 7 poll. 
Party statutes give De Camps, as party president, authority 
to call primary elections, and only a very close legal 
interpretation by the JCE could set it aside. (The JCE ruled 
on December 5 on a factional dispute within the opposition 
PRSC, disallowing actions by both groups but favoring the 
party\'s president and presidential candidate against 
challengers who claim to have more rank-and-file support.) 
 
The protracted nomination struggle within the PRD has 
consumed its leaders\' energies and left former President 
(1996-2000) Leonel Fernandez of the opposition PLD sitting in 
the catbird seat. The PRD must recover from its multiple 
splits in the next few weeks to have any chance of offsetting 
popular discontent with Mejia by challenging Fernandez\'s 
record and creating a credible alternative to the \"once and 
future\" president. 
 
2.  (U)  Draft: Bainbridge Cowell. 
KUBISKE 
"
"12605","12/9/2003 10:59","03SANTODOMINGO7134","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","03SANTODOMINGO6999","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 007134 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR AND EB/IFD; PLEASE PASS TO USTR 
SCRONIN AND AID/LAC. TREASURY FOR OASIA/RTOLOUI; NSC FOR 
HCRUZ; COMMERCE FOR VDEES. 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/05/2005 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, ECIN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN PESO STEADY ONE WEEK AFTER PRESIDENT 
TAKES STEPS TO KEEP EXCHANGE HOUSES IN LINE 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 6999 
 
Classified By: EcoPol Counselor Michael Meigs.  Reason: 1.5(b) and (d). 
 
 1.  (SBU) Summary: The Dominican Peso (RD) continues to hold 
steady against the dollar one week after President Mejia 
talked it down while appointing a commission headed by 
military and police to counter alleged irregularities in 
trading(reftel).  Foreign exchange houses and banks were 
buying dollars for between RD37.50 and RD38.60 in light 
trading December 8, and the spread between \"buy\" and \"sell\" 
had narrowed from 300-400 basis points prior to the 
President\'s action to between 30 and 200 basis points. 
Although companies report that dollars are readily available, 
there still seems to be uncertainty in the market.  The IMF 
has expressed concern over the latest steps by the GODR.  End 
summary. 
 
----------------------- 
President Hanging Tough 
----------------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) Weekend press reported that Mejia has given 
exchange houses five days to account for all of their 
currency trades over the past 11 months.  Mejia also 
reiterated over the weekend that the peso should be valued at 
RD30 per dollar.   The GODR is reportedly establishing 
communication links between the tax authorities and Customs 
to strengthen control of foreign exchange and to stem tax 
evasion.  Embassy has not seen or heard any evidence, 
however, of military or police or other GODR authorities 
interfering or intimidating people exchanging money. 
 
 
3. (C) Armed Forces Secretary LTG Soto Jimenez told DCM and 
DATT on December 8 that military involvement in the 
President\'s campaign was limited to intelligence efforts to 
identify unlicensed exchange houses and irregular currency 
exchange practices, plus some technical involvement in 
auditing firms.  He says that tomorrow\'s press will carry a 
list of all firms authorized to deal in foreign exchange for 
the public. 
 
----------------- 
Banks Remain Calm 
----------------- 
 
4.  (SBU) Officials from two major Dominican banks and others 
from the only two foreign banks operating here remain 
seemingly unconcerned about what many have described as 
heavy-handed tactics by Mejia. Each affirmed that his bank 
does not take positions in dollars except to cover capital 
requirements and immediate financing needs, so they are 
relatively indifferent to the actual peso/dollar exchange 
rate.  Bankers who attended last week\'s meeting with the 
President told similar stories.  They said that there is 
somehow a perception that the dollar should be trading for 
around RD30, and exchange traders in the meeting told the 
President this was an achievable goal.  One banker theorized 
that there had been hoarding of dollars, but following the 
President\'s appointment of a commission, people are again 
selling dollars for fear the peso may actually continue to 
appreciate. 
 
----------------------- 
The IMF Still Concerned 
------------------------- 
 
5.  (SBU)  The IMF team currently in country negotiating a 
new standby agreement has achieved some progress on issues 
such as tightening monetary policy and narrowing the fiscal 
deficit. The IMF resrep said that Mejia\'s repeated 
pronouncements that the peso should trade at RD30 appeared to 
be in violation of the general obligations of IMF members 
(Article VII of the IMF Articles of Agreement).  He commented 
that this might delay an agreement. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
6.  (SBU) There are several possible reasons for the peso\'s 
recent appreciation: First, Mejia\'s effort came concurrent 
with the seasonal influx of dollars from holiday remittances 
and the high tourism season. Second, some are dumping dollars 
out of concern that the rate could be forced lower.  However, 
the depreciation over the past year was largely attributable 
to dramatic increase in the money supply and a decrease in 
confidence.  Those underlying causes remain.  Central Bank 
certificates continue to turn over at high interest rates, 
and few interlocutors believe the GODR can force the exchange 
rate down for very long.  Moreover, if the GODR fails to 
reach agreement with the Fund or fails to meet its pending 
financial obligations, the peso strengthening of the past 
week could reverse rapidly. 
 
KUBISKE 
"
"12637","12/10/2003 17:37","03SANTODOMINGO7194","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","03SANTODOMINGO6707","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 007194 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/10/2013 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, OVIP, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC PLEDGES SUPPORT FOR UN HUMAN 
RIGHTS COMMISSION 
 
REF: A. SANTO DOMINGO 6707 
 
     B. SANTO DOMINGO 4990 
 
Classified By: ECOPOL COUNSELOR MICHAEL MEIGS FOR REASONS 1.5 (B/D) 
 
SUMMARY 
 
1. (U) DRL PDAS Ambassador Michael Kozak and DRL Office of 
Multilateral Affairs Deputy Director Lynn Sicade visited the 
Dominican Republic November 20-22 to build support for the UN 
Commission on Human Rights, in which the GODR will 
participate starting next year.  Meetings with local 
governmental and nongovernmental interlocutors provided 
Ambassador Kozak with a broad sense of the Dominican 
Republic\'s commitment to respect for human rights 
internationally and domestically.  The Dominican Government 
pledged its support for UN human rights initiatives with a 
particular emphasis on children\'s rights.  Some Dominican 
officials acknowledged the country\'s human rights concerns 
with neighbor Haiti and asked Ambassador Kozak to communicate 
those concerns to the USG.  End Summary. 
 
KOZAK VISIT: A POSITIVE FIRST STEP 
 
2. (U) Ambassador Michael Kozak and Lynn Sicade met with 
Ambassador Hertell and emboffs to reiterate close bilateral 
collaboration regarding the Dominican Republic\'s upcoming 
seat at the UN Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR), scheduled 
for March 2004.  Ambassador Kozak explained how important it 
will be to change UNCHR\'s current composition -- removing 
undemocratic member governments -- and to request the GODR\'s 
cooperation in that effort.  He said region-wide support from 
UNCHR members will be critical to push through resolutions 
considered priority to the USG, for example on rights of the 
child.  Given the Dominican Republic\'s current emphasis on 
protecting children (reftel B), the GODR could also 
collaborate next year with the UN as it celebrates \"The Year 
of the Family.\" 
 
TAKING HUMAN RIGHTS TO THE HIGHEST LEVEL 
 
3. (SBU) Ambassador Kozak and Sicade met with President 
Mejia\'s sister and brother-in-law, Chavela and Sergio 
Grullon, to deliver the message about the Dominican 
Republic\'s UNCHR participation at the highest levels.  As 
President of the National Council on Children and Adolescents 
(CONANI), Chavela Grullon has been prominently promoting 
children\'s rights.  Secretary of the Presidency Sergio 
Grullon serves as one of President Mejia\'s closest advisers. 
Both said they would share USG concerns about the UNCHR with 
President Mejia.  Both were also proud of the GODR\'s recent 
efforts against trafficking in persons and strengthening of 
the Code on Minors.  Chavela passionately recounted her 
personal endeavors  to protect children from trafficking and 
poverty, including helping to raise street kids she had 
rescued.  She also seemed eager to encourage GODR sponsorship 
of any UNCHR resolution on children\'s and family issues. 
Chavela encouraged Ambassador Kozak and the Embassy to use 
the good offices of her daughter, assigned recently to the 
Dominican mission at the EU, to promote UNCHR objectives. 
 
FOREIGN RELATIONS SECRETARIAT SUPPORTS UNCHR 
 
4. (U) Senior officials at the Foreign Relations Secretariat 
assured Ambassador Kozak of GODR support of USG objectives at 
the UNCHR.  Meeting participants included: 
Ambassador Rhadys Abreu de Polanco, Deputy Director of 
International Organizations Division and Human Rights Official 
Ambassador Jorge Santiago, Legal Advisor and Director of 
National Commission on Refugees 
Ambassador Francia Sencion, Director of Americas Division 
Ambassador Roger Espaillait, Director of North American 
Affairs Office 
Ambassador Maritza Guerrero, Trade Agreements Office 
 
5. (U) The officials told us that the Foreign Relations 
Secretariat had worked diligently to establish an 
 
SIPDIS 
inter-institutional commission on human rights, which would 
be announced soon by presidential decree.  Ambassador 
Santiago said this initiative embodied their belief that 
promoting human rights was everyone\'s responsibility, not 
just the Secretariat\'s.  Ambassador Kozak congratulated the 
officials said he hoped other countries could follow the 
Dominican Republic\'s example.  He also thanked the GODR for 
its support on the Canadian-sponsored UNGA resolution on Iran 
and the US candidate for the UN Committee on the Elimination 
of all Forms of Racial Discrimination (CERD) (reftel A). 
 
6. (U) Sicade went into more detail about disputes over 
technical language in certain conventions.  She said, for 
example, that the USG did not favor ratifying the convention 
on the rights of the child because it contains the phrase 
\"the standard\" versus \"a standard.\"  Meeting participants 
appeared to understand that the USG, when it questions 
linguistic technicalities in international conventions, does 
not mean to jeopardize their spirit or objectives, but rather 
aims to avoid conflict with pre-existing U.S. laws. 
Ambassador Kozak emphasized that all signatory countries to 
international conventions or resolutions should verify that 
domestic compliance mechanisms are already in place. 
Participants agreed that states must create the necessary 
conditions in which citizens can exercise their human rights. 
 
OFF THE RECORD WITH JOURNALISTS 
 
7. (U) In an off-the-record briefing for prominent print and 
television journalists, Ambasssdor Kozak reiterated the USG\'s 
desire to coordinate closely with the GODR during its UNCHR 
membership and reviewed our desire to streamline UNCHR 
procedures to make it a more effective proponent of human 
rights in undemocratic countries.  The journalists asked 
about USG concerns over human rights issues in the Dominican 
Republic, such as murders by police.  Emboffs referred to the 
country report on human rights and commented on a recent 
reduction of those killings.  A prominent newspaper editor 
asked whether President Mejia\'s announced intent to seek 
re-election next year was undermining foreign confidence in 
the GODR.  Emboff replied that the USG expected the election 
to be free, fair, transparent, and clean -- in line with the 
past two presidential elections here -- and that 
international and domestic observers would provide the 
necessary confidence in the election process. 
 
COMMENT AND RECOMMENDATION 
 
8. (C) The GODR is open to cooperation with us in the UN 
context, but also is inclined to join consensus in regional 
groupings such as GRULAC or the Rio Group.  To achieve the 
USG goal of prior coordination on UNCHR resolutions, we will 
need to go in early to discuss specific draft texts and 
solicit the support of the GODR before it commits to regional 
positions that might differ from ours. 
KUBISKE 
"
"12677","12/12/2003 21:53","03SANTODOMINGO7304","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

122153Z Dec 03
","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 SANTO DOMINGO 007304 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, WHA/PA, G/TIP, PM, EB, 
EB/OMA; TREASURY FOR UNDER SECRETARY TAYLOR, DO:NLEE, 
RTOLOUI, LLAMONICA; NSC FOR SHANNON, CRUZ; WHITE HOUSE PASS 
USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, OVIP, PREL, PHUM, MARR, DR 
SUBJECT: ASSISTANT SECRETARY NORIEGA ADDRESSES DOMINICAN 
CONGRESS 
 
 
 1.  Summary.  Assistant Secretary of State for Western 
Hemisphere Affairs (WHA) Roger Noriega addressed a joint 
meeting of the Dominican Congress on December 10 in the 
Senate chamber.  He urged congressional representatives to 
act quickly on a 2004 budget and he laid out U.S. views on 
the pending Article 98 agreement, on trafficking in persons, 
and on free trade agreements.  Noriega concluded his historic 
address with a call for Dominican institutions to protect the 
public and to prosecute bank fraud.  Press commentary and 
English text of speech are given below. End summary. 
 
2.  On December 10 during a 24-hour visit to Santo Domingo, 
Assistant Secretary of State for Western Hemisphere Affairs 
(WHA) Roger Noriega addressed a joint meeting of the 
Dominican Senate and House of Representatives. He called on 
the elected representatives to assume their responsibilities 
by considering and quickly passing a 2004 budget to be 
presented by the GODR in connection with IMF negotiations. 
He praised and thanked Dominican troops supporting Operation 
Iraqi Freedom, asked congress to ratify the Article 98 
agreement as soon as it is presented by the Executive, and 
advised them of sanctions in U.S. law for countries which do 
not enforce legislation against trafficking in persons.  He 
stressed that the United States shares the Dominican people\'s 
interest in free and fair elections and he outlined 
advantages of free trade agreements, both bilateral and in 
the Free Trade Area of the Americas. 
 
2.  Noriega expressed the sympathy of the United States for 
Dominicans in their current economic difficulty, commenting, 
\"There are no easy solutions for deep-rooted problems and 
there are no shortcuts to lasting recovery.\"  He called upon 
all sectors of public opinion and economic activity to share 
the responsibility of finding a sustainable economic program, 
which \"will require sacrifice and tough decisions.\"  He 
reminded congressional representatives, \"There is no greater 
honor for any elected leader than putting the national 
interest above his own.\" 
 
3.  The Assistant Secretary rejected pessimism and cynicism, 
reminding listeners that although finances of the Dominican 
economy are in \"profound disorder,\" the country\'s productive 
capacity is intact, Dominicans are hard working, and they 
want to see laws and regulations respected.  He called 
explicitly for full prosecution of bank fraud cases now in 
the Dominican justice system. \"These cases are too important. 
 All of us who respect and admire the Dominican people are 
watching -- and expecting to see the people well served and 
protected by their institutions and by their elected 
officials.\" 
 
COMMENT 
 
4.  This was a memorable and vivid event.  Noriega spoke in 
Spanish, standing at a long table on the dais of the Senate 
chamber, accompanied by the presidents of both houses and by 
the Ambassador.  The live wall of press cameras caught the 
drama of his stance before the golden mural dominating the 
Senate chamber.  The chamber was full.  Images carried in the 
broadcast media that evening played up the drama of the 
setting. 
 
5.  Some print journalists later tried to elicit complaints 
from various political leaders about \"U.S. interference\" in 
this event and the Noriega visit, but no one was buying that 
line.  President of the House of Represenatives rejected the 
word and commented that the United States had asked for the 
venue as a way to speak directly to the Dominican people 
through its representatives, \"the authentic voices of the 
people.\"  Speaking separately, spokesmen of all three major 
parties flatly objected to the journalists\' characterizations 
and replied that Noriega was demonstrating the non-partisan 
stance of the U.S. in favor of democracy.  \"Man in the 
street\" interviews by one paper found three passers-by 
willing to agree that U.S. action was, in fact, interference 
-- and that it was a good thing, because Dominican politicans 
needed to hear the messages. 
 
6.  The first editorial comment has been favorable. 
 
- - The lead editorial in the GODR-owned Listin Diario of 
December 12 highlighted its key sentence, \"If right now the 
North Americans are interested in getting to know our 
difficulties in depth, there is nothing bad about that, 
especially since not a few critics of White House policy 
accuse it of neglecting U.S. neighbors in Latin America in 
favor of events in the Middle East.\" 
 
- -In \"El Caribe,\"  commentator Flavio Dario Espinal noted 
that the Republic has not received such high-level attention 
from U.S. administrations since 1994, and he stressed the 
political message: \"It is no coincidence that Assistant 
Secretary Noriega placed such emphasis not only in free and 
 
SIPDIS 
transparent elections but also in the need for election 
observers, for which he pledged U.S. support. . . (the 
message) shows that even though the Bush administration 
values the support of the Dominican administration, it places 
equal importance on political stability and a regular 
electoral process, especially in the context of a region 
already suffering from too many political conflicts and 
crises of governability.\" 
 
- - PLD-inclined \"Hoy\" has not yet published a substantive 
op-ed piece on the Noriega visit, although on the first day 
of the visit it carried praise of the Ambassador for his 
impartial handling of the political parties regarding the 
elections.  \"Hoy\" counterweighted that stance the next day 
with one cranky paragraph on Noriega subtitled \"How Times 
Have Changed!\" in a column of political tidbits.  The writer 
noted the positions of the three parties on the visit as \"an 
unusual convergence of views\" about the Assistant Secretary\'s 
appearance in Congress, \"unprecedented, as far as we know, in 
our legislative history.  But so goes the world, so think our 
politicians, and some people say that it is all the fault of 
globalization.  And it probably is, who knows, but it would 
have been preferable, and much less embarrassing, to offer 
Mr. Noriega another setting in which to take the liberty of 
pushing his imperial reprimand into our faces.\" 
 
- - The same page of \"Hoy\" featured \"Cocktail Talk,\" a 
satirical series written in pseudo-popular jargon.  Excerpts: 
 
\"So, Joe, we want the United States to save us, help us out, 
either directly or through those international credit 
organisms, from this hole we got ourselves into. Okay, so if 
we are looking for that, we can\'t complain if they, with all 
the good reasons in the world, try to tell us what to do. 
And all that before the next explosion of the European 
National Bomb (note: European Union Ambassador Miguel Amado), 
hotter than hell, who won\'t give us a nickle unless we cut 
ourselves in two. . . Noriega\'s position about that dirty 
work on bank fraud isn\'t new.  When somebody tried 
unofficially to get some contingency funds out of the Yankee 
Treasury to deal with the hole, they told us straight out 
that the U.S. taxpayers weren\'t going to pay the bill for 
anybody\'s larceny. . . .We can\'t exactly get huffy if Noriega 
is telling us that our economy is in a profound disorder. 
You think maybe it ain\'t so?  Or that the economy, the way it 
stands, is a healthy little thing?  That\'s no news, either. 
And with the business about electoral transparency, the North 
Americans aren\'t getting their powder wet, either.  That\'s 
what Dr. Joaquin Balaguer thought, that they were bluffing 
back in 1978 after they sent down their best fast-ball 
pitchers back then, Andrew Young and Terence Todman. And we 
all know what happened then, even if that slippery ole 
Doctor, no dummy himself,  hijacked the Senate for his 
project (note: Balaguer lost the presidency in a free and 
fair election). And so the Yankees are gonna maintain their 
relations with whoever wins clean elections next year -- why 
shouldn\'t they?  Ain\'t the three big boys in the major 
parties all about the same kind of pool hall layabouts?  Sure 
would like to hear what Noriega would say if there was some 
kind of chance in the elections for (hard-line leftists) 
Narciso Isa Conde or Fernando Pena. . . .\" 
 
7.  Embassy\'s informal translation of the Assistant 
Secretary\'s speech follows. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
(begin text) 
 
Distinguished President of the Senate Dr. Jesus Vasquez; 
Distinguished President of the House of Representatives Dr. 
Alfredo Pacheco; 
Distinguished Senators and Representatives, 
Members of the Press, 
To All of You, My Friends, 
 
It is a great honor to be allowed to speak to you today. 
 
I will use this opportunity to speak about the policy of 
President Bush,s administration toward the Americas. 
President Bush believes that the American nations are of 
critical importance for the security and well being of our 
country.  He has demonstrated his commitment to the region 
from the first days of his administration and has articulated 
a clear policy that we are carrying out. 
 
Our goal is to build an inter-American community, united by 
the shared values of freedom supported by the rule of law and 
by solid democratic institutions, driven by free trade and 
free investment. 
 
Your responsibility as representatives of the Dominican 
people is great.  Making the law is a high honor and a solemn 
obligation.  I know, because I was for a number of years an 
advisor to your counterparts in the United States Congress in 
Washington, concentrating on strategies to improve our 
relations with the countries of the Americas.  Our two 
countries work closely together in the UN, in the OAS, and in 
the WTO, as well as in other institutions.   And soon you 
will be asked to ratify a bilateral Free Trade Agreement with 
the United States that we hope will provide lasting benefits 
to our two countries and to all our people. 
 
More than just a neighbor and a friend, I come here as a 
brother.  Although my family comes from Mexico, it is in the 
United States that millions of Dominicans and Mexicans have 
found a common home. 
 
Yes, we share baseball, of course.  But we share much more 
than that.  Ties of blood unite us.  There are more than a 
million Dominicans living in the United States.  Even so, a 
piece of their heart will always remain in their native land. 
 
And more than sixty thousand U.S. citizens live here.  And 
many thousands of U.S. tourists come here to enjoy the warm 
hospitality of this beautiful country. 
 
Let me discuss with you some of the principal aspects of our 
relationship. 
 
Security 
 
One of the principal aims we share is to make the world a 
safer place for our citizens and for the international 
community. 
 
When terrorists attacked on September 11, there were 
Dominicans among the citizens of more than 80 countries who 
were victims.  The economic effects of terrorism were felt 
almost immediately in the Dominican Republic. 
 
In their actions and replies, Dominicans looked outward, 
taking part in subjects with global reach, pledging 
themselves to the openness and freedom that those terrorists 
attacked. 
 
In Iraq elite Dominican troops are working with international 
forces. 
 
Allow me to pay tribute to the contribution that your country 
has made in sending your sons to serve beside ours.  To their 
fathers and mothers, their families and friends, on behalf of 
my country, I wish to say,  &Thank you.  Your demonstration 
of friendship, your sacrifice and your courage will not be 
forgotten.8 
 
Acknowledging the role of military forces engaged in 
supporting the peace, our countries signed an agreement 
concerning Article 98 of the treaty creating the 
International Criminal Court.  We mutually recognize the 
sovereign responsibility of our governments for the actions 
of their respective military forces.  I respectfully request 
that you ratify this agreement as soon as it is presented to 
you. 
 
Considering another aspect of security, narcotics traffickers 
threaten our societies and create an environment ripe for 
other crimes and criminals.  The United States are pleased to 
cooperate with the Dominican Republic to make our communities 
safer and more secure. 
 
Also fundamental for security is the respect for the 
principles of human rights.  We are deeply concerned about 
the trafficking of persons, including across international 
boundaries, and especially by the completely unacceptable 
practice of sexual exploitation of women and children. 
 
For our part, the United States Congress has mandated the 
suspension of many forms of our government assistance to 
countries which do not take action against trafficking in 
persons, and it has instructed U.S. executive directors of 
the international financial institutions to vote against 
loans to those countries. 
 
This year you approved an excellent law against trafficking 
in persons and the administration has set up entities to deal 
with these problems.  We will do everything in our power to 
cooperate with the Dominican authorities to help them put and 
end to this trafficking and to organized illegal migration, 
once and for all. 
 
Democracy 
 
Further, some words about another priority: supporting a 
strong, functioning democracy.  I have followed with interest 
the preparations and debates concerning the presidential 
election.  I see a vigorous debate about the candidates, 
politics, and process.  This is good.  It is a sign that the 
democratic process is working. 
 
During my brief visit here I seek to contact all of the 
leading political parties to tell them that we look forward 
to working with the winner of the May 2004 presidential 
elections.  Dominicans are expecting a clean, transparent 
election ) and the country is fully capable of carrying one 
out.  The United States shares this interest with you. 
 
Trade 
 
Another of our principal bilateral concerns ) we are 
emphasizing to our partners in the region the need to 
conclude the negotiations on a Free Trade Area of the 
Americas by January, 2005. 
 
We expect that all leaders of the region will consider the 
FTAA an indispensable tool for the economic and social 
development of their own countries.  We have a moral 
obligation, as leaders, to make the promise of the FTAA a 
reality. 
 
Free trade agreements provide greater confidence for 
investment and foreign direct investment accelerates economic 
growth.  In addition, they establish transparent, 
well-defined rules for trade, thereby strengthening 
institutions and the rule of law. 
 
The Economy 
 
Another key point of our bilateral relationship is the 
participation of citizens in the making of their 
government,s policy.  You yourselves are now involved in a 
far reaching undertaking of this kind. 
 
As your good friends and partners, we are all aware of the 
concerns your people feel: inflation, the falling value of the 
peso*in sum, the worries about your economic future. 
 
One important point: the United States is not indifferent to 
the problems of the Dominican Republic. 
 
There are no easy solutions for deep-rooted problems and 
there are no shortcuts to lasting recovery.  Nevertheless, I 
am convinced that all the different parties in these 
negotiations are dedicated to developing a sustainable, 
healthy plan that will help the Dominican people to help 
themselves. 
 
All responsible sectors of public opinion and of economic 
activity share the responsibility of finding a sustainable 
economic program. 
 
Debate is healthy, but never-ending debate can only be 
harmful.  The international community wants to help, and will 
do so.  But we can do so, only once the Dominican people take 
the necessary agreed steps. 
 
This program will require sacrifice and tough decisions. 
Your responsibility to the Dominican people is to examine 
immediately the proposals of the government and to vote 
promptly for the common good of the country. 
 
There is no greater honor for any elected leader than putting 
the national interest above his own.  We trust that you will 
carry out the responsibilities you have taken on behalf of 
the country, for, after all, that is why you are here. 
 
Many Dominicans are pessimistic about the future.  Many doubt 
that there will be any prosecution of those responsible for 
the banking frauds that led to the present dilemma. 
 
It is necessary to reject this pessimism and cynicism.  Yes, 
certainly, the finances of the Dominican economy are in great 
disarray.  But the productive capacity of the country is 
healthy.  Dominicans are very hard working people who love 
their country and want to see their laws and regulations 
respected. 
 
It is here and now that Dominicans must act.  And now is the 
time for justice to be done.  The Dominican justice system 
must prosecute bank fraud cases all the way to their outcome, 
with the rigorous, transparent application of Dominican law. 
These cases are too important.  All of us who respect and 
admire the Dominican people are watching ) and expecting to 
see the people well served and protected by their 
institutions and by their elected officials. 
 
Conclusion 
 
Distinguished friends, we share a hemisphere and a future; 
and none of us is ready to accept failure.  What,s at stake 
for our people is too important ) the promise of democracy, 
economic freedom, and eradication of poverty. 
 
I look forward with great interest to working with our 
friends in the hemisphere to face the challenges we have 
before us. 
 
I thank you for the honor of allowing me to speak to you in 
this historic institution. 
 
(end) 
HERTELL 
"
"12696","12/15/2003 11:22","03SANTODOMINGO7306","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","03KUWAIT5368","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 007306 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/12/2013 
TAGS: DR, MARR, PREL 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC SIGNS SOFA WITH KUWAIT 
 
REF: KUWAIT 5368 
 
Classified By: ECOPOL COUNSELOR MICHAEL MEIGS FOR REASON 1.4 (B/D). 
 
(C) THE SECRETARIAT OF FOREIGN RELATIONS LEGAL ADVISER JORGE 
SANTIAGO HAS INFORMED US THAT THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC SIGNED 
AND ON DECEMBER 12 TRANSMITTED VIA DIPLOMATIC NOTE A 
BILATERAL STATUS OF FORCES AGREEMENT (SOFA) WITH KUWAIT.  THE 
SOFA, SIGNED BY SECRETARY OF STATE FOR ARMED FORCES JOSE 
MIGUEL SOTO JIMENEZ (PER KUWAITI REQUEST), WAS SENT BY FAX 
AND THE ORIGINAL DISPATCHED BY EXPRESS MAIL TO THE DOMINICAN 
EMBASSY IN CARACAS, WHICH PROVIDED THE FAX VERSION TO THE 
KUWAITI EMBASSY THERE.  ORIGINAL, WHEN RECEIVED IN CARACAS, 
WILL ALSO BE PASSED TO THE KUWAITIS.  THE GODR WILL AWAIT A 
SIGNED REPLY FROM KUWAIT. 
HERTELL 
"
"12706","12/15/2003 17:41","03SANTODOMINGO7342","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 007342 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), WHA/PPC; DEPT PASS USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/05/2008 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EFIN, ECON, DR 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR MOBILIZES DIPLOMATIC INITIATIVE AGAINST 
DOMINICAN FRAUD AND CORRUPTION 
 
 
Classified By: DCM LISA KUBISKE.  Reason: 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary.  On December 2, the Ambassador urged eight 
ambassadors of the OECD \"Dublin Group\" of the need for strong 
coordinated action against banking fraud and corruption. 
Ambassadors agreed on the poor state of the economy, the need 
for free and fair presidential elections, and the ability of 
the diplomatic community to make an impact.  The group 
decided that joint public calls would draw attention to 
international concerns and help the Dominicans help 
themselves.  They agreed to call jointly on the Central 
Election Board (JCE), Friday, December 5.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) On December 2 the Ambassador hosted a meeting at 
the Embassy to discuss Dominican bank fraud cases 
(particularly the Baninter case) and the financial downturn 
in the Dominican Republic.  Ambassadors to the Dominican 
Republic from Canada, The United Kingdom, Italy, France, 
Germany, The Netherlands, Spain, and Japan attended, along 
with the EU ambassador and Embassy Santo Domingo\'s DCM, USAID 
Director and EcoPol Chief (hereinafter, Group).  The 
discussion quickly turned to the general state of the economy 
in the Dominican Republic with all members agreeing that the 
financial crisis was brought on in large part by the massive 
bank fraud in the Baninter case as well as other bank 
failures (Bancredito and the expected failure of Banco 
Mercantil).  Opinions were varied on what, if anything, the 
Group could do to assist the Dominicans in their plight. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Economic Questions and Comments 
-------------------------------- 
 
3.  (C) EU ambassador Miguel Amado inquired about the 
November 21-22 to Santo Domingo  of U.S. Treasury Under 
Secretary John Taylor. Canadian Ambassador Adam Blackwell 
 
SIPDIS 
gave an account of measures taken that day by President Mejia 
to stabilize the currency exchange rate (septel) and 
commented that the underground economy may total 20 per cent 
of GDP. Spanish Ambassador Maria Jesus Figa Lopez Palop 
commented that one way to deal with the crisis is simply not 
to deal with it at all, but to let nature take its course. 
 
4.  (C) The U.S. delegation provided an overview of U/S 
Taylor\'s trip and commented on the status of the IMF 
negotiations.  After some debate and acerbic comment, 
especially from the French Ambassador Jean Claude Moyret, all 
members of the Group concluded that the Dominicans are on the 
path of meeting IMF conditionality and staying on track so as 
to benefit from IFI financing. The Group is concerned about 
the possibility of political destabilization during a period 
of austerity. 
 
------------------------ 
Politics and Elections 
------------------------ 
 
5.  (SBU) The Group agreed that a joint visit to the 
Elections Board (JCE)  would make a strong statement to the 
GODR and the public that the international community is 
engaged and will be watchful during the 2004 Presidential 
elections.  First proposals were to do this on December 5; 
subsequently, due to unidentified scheduling difficulties 
(and probably because of the unavailability of the U.S. 
ambassador next week) the call was set for December 15. 
 
6.  (C) British ambassador Andrew Ashford, seconded by the 
German ambassador, made the point that individual missions, 
as well as the Group as a whole, should remain engaged in 
promoting fair elections throughout the  campaign.  He 
proposed that the Group meet each of the three major party 
candidates to stress this message. Some members hesitated on 
contacts which might be seen as overtly political, but the 
Group did agree that continued involvement was key. All 
favored meeting jointly during the transition period with the 
eventual winner of the election. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Back to Baninter and the other Banks 
------------------------------------- 
 
7.  (C) The Ambassador returned the discussion to fraud and 
failures at Baninter, Bancredito and Banco Mercantil.  German 
Ambassador Eva Kendeffy said that the Central Bank had 
guaranteed repayment of USD 20 million that Germany had 
contracted through Baninter for loans to small and medium 
sized businesses.  The Germans doubt the return of these 
funds any time soon, given the Central Bank\'s lack of funds. 
A number of contact clauses were broken by Baninter in regard 
to the funds.  The USD 20 million was not used in the manner 
stipulated in the agreement and the Germans were not 
officially notified when Baninter began liquidation 
proceedings, also a requirement under the contract. 
 
8.  (C) Spanish Ambassador Figa Lopez Palop said that Spain 
had no interest in the bank and, therefore, it was not of any 
concern to her country.  She did comment that \"(Arturo) 
Pellerano now has to be considered, along with a third bank.\" 
(Note: Pellerano was the President of Bancredito. Fraud 
charges against him are being reviewed by the Attorney 
General\'s Office (septel).  The \"third\" one is Banco 
Mercantil. No charges have been made against its executives, 
but the business community is expecting them.  End Note.) 
Both British Ambassador Andrew Ashcroft and Dutch Ambassador 
Rasha ter Braack also said that the greater concern is the 
number of banks that have been or are in trouble.  British 
Ambassador Ashcroft tried to find the bright side in the 
dismal banking situation: \"Without Baninter there would be no 
IMF (loans and conditionality), so some good has come out of 
Baninter.\" 
 
-------------------------- 
Strikes and Civil Unrest 
-------------------------- 
 
9.  (SBU) The Dutch, Spanish and German ambassadors raised 
the prospect of further strikes and possible civil unrest if 
the economic fortunes of the country do not turn around. 
Press reports on December 2, said that a second general 
strike toward the end of January is possible.  The German 
ambassador commented that the German press widely covered the 
last strike (November 11), resulting in hundreds of calls to 
the German Foreign Ministry about the safety of relatives and 
friends vacationing here.  (\"Most of the Germans were 
probably, \"in Punta Cana and did not even know of the 
strike.\")  British Ambassador Ashcroft noted the recent 
floods, increase in the price of gasoline and shortages of 
propane cooking gas, could prompt further protests. 
 
------------------------------- 
The Group\'s Agenda 
------------------------------- 
 
10. (SBU) Pondering further action, members of the Group 
proposed other visits in addition to the trip to the JCE: one 
to the civil society \'Elections Monitoring Group\" chaired by 
Msgr Agripino Nunez to discuss elections; one to the 
Dominican association of bankers for information on the 
financial climate; and a separate discussion of bank fraud 
with Finance Minister Rafael Calderon, Central Bank Governor 
Lois Malkum, Technical Secretary to the President Carlos 
Desperdel, and Superintendent of Banks Julio Cross.  These 
visits and meetings have not been scheduled, but the Group 
seemed to be aiming for after the holiday season. 
 
 
11.  (U) Ambassadors of the Group thanked Ambassador Hertell 
for his initiative in hosting the meeting.  They complimented 
him on the timeliness of discussing the economic and 
political events currently taking place in the nation. 
------------------------------- 
Comment 
------------------------------- 
 
12.  (SBU) Comment.  The response of the senior diplomatic 
community to the Ambassador\'s invitation was encouraging, as 
was the frankness of the discussion.  A united diplomatic 
front of leading developed nations calling on the Electoral 
Board, the banking sector, and  civil society will advance 
U.S. goals for promoting democracy and good governance. The 
Dominican press will certainly publicize the initiatives. 
 
13.  (C) French Ambassador Moyret was by far the most 
pessimistic of the group -- \"There is no way to stop the 
disaster\" and \"IMF loans will not be enough, four times the 
amount of the loans will be needed.\"  Canadian Ambassador 
Blackwell and EU representative Amado were engaged and 
verbal, advocating early, visible action. Spanish Ambassador 
Figa Lopez Palop was outspoken but  fatalistic.  Japanese 
Ambassador Okamoto sat stoically through the two hour meeting 
saying not one word. 
HERTELL 
"
"12707","12/15/2003 17:41","03SANTODOMINGO7343","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 007343 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/PA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN PRESS PRAISE FOR AMBASSADOR HERTELL 
 
1.  Dominican newspapers have reacted favorably to the 
Ambassador\'s recent actions staking out the U.S. position on 
free and fair presidential elections.  They recently carried 
a number of accounts stressing U.S. impartiality in Dominican 
politics, based on comments from leaders of opposition 
political parties whom the Ambassador hosted on December 3 
and 4 for luncheon discussions of their views (septels 
follow). Reporters and broadcasters have promptly and 
prominently featured this message, which the Ambassador has 
delivered impromptu to them during encounters in recent 
months. 
 
2.  On December 10, Santo Domingo\'s leading newspaper \"El 
Caribe\" carried an editorial cartoon featuring its stock 
comic commentator on current events, a heavy-set grumpy 
mustachioed man similar to the figure in the \"Pink Panther\" 
animated cartoons.  He is dressed as a housewife with broom 
and bucket, vacuum cleaner nearby, speaking into a telephone: 
\"Of course, of course, Ambassador Hertell, we are getting 
ready to have clean elections!\"  (Chief Editor Victor Manuel 
Tejada sent the original to the Ambassador, with his 
compliments.) 
 
3.  The same day, the wide-circulation populist paper \"Hoy\" 
carried the following op-ed piece signed by commentator 
Victor Gulias: 
 
(begin informal translation) 
 
THE AMERICAN AMBASSADOR 
 
The Ambassador of the United States in this country is doing 
the right thing when, according to press reports, he sets 
forth the position of his government vis-a-vis the upcoming 
presidential elections: that the Bush administration pledges 
to limit itself to supporting a transparent process which 
permits Dominicans freely to choose the governing official of 
their preference. 
 
And the stance of the Ambassador is positive, especially 
facing the rumors which suggest a supposed partiality of the 
White House in favor of certain presidential hopefuls, which, 
if it were true, would constitute not only an interference in 
our affairs, but also a serious political error. 
 
The United States knows better than many the situation of our 
country and it is no secret for anyone that its embassy in 
Santo Domingo carries out occasional polls to check the pulse 
and the feeling of the public about its governing officials 
and about Dominican presidential candidates. (sic) 
 
Over the time that he has headed the U.S. diplomatic mission 
in our country, this gentleman born in the nearby sister 
Island of Enchantment, Puerto Rico, has conducted himself 
with dignity, prudence, impartiality and stature, as it 
should be and as is appropriate for a person of his high 
functions.  This conduct is recognized by everyone. 
 
The Ambassador\'s meetings with Dominican political leaders 
demonstrate simultaneously his impartiality, given that 
according to press reports he has invited to his diplomatic 
seat the representatives of both PRSC factions as well as the 
PLD leaders, at the time that he has been arranging a meeting 
with the contending parties of the ruling PRD.  All of that, 
we believe, contributes to the governability of the country, 
since nobody is unaware of the power of the Americans, in the 
country and in the world. 
 
Ambassador Hertell, assisted by his affable character, his 
disciplined personal style and his talent for dealing with 
people, is well liked in the country and does his work 
without affectation, with discretion and intelligence, which 
helps to improve the very close relations which tie us to the 
United States of America.  These qualities are evident to 
all, along with his certainty that his government will watch 
over the transparency of the elections this coming year. 
 
That transparency, as the United States well knows, is vital 
for preserving calm and social peace in the country.  May 
free and clean elections be organized, may the winner be he 
who gets the most votes, may popular will be respected and 
may the president and vice-president  proclaimed without 
delay -- all these are historical imperatives, since it does 
not benefit the Americans, or the Dominicans, or the 
Caribbean or Latin America for there to be a new hot spot of 
conflict, conflict and riots in Santo Domingo. 
 
Hail, then, to the correct position of the friendly 
Government of the Untied States, as expressed by its 
distinguished and affable ambassador, Mr. Hans Hertell, whom 
we congratulate for such a clear and transparent stand. 
 
(end text) 
HERTELL 
"
"12708","12/15/2003 17:41","03SANTODOMINGO7344","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 007344 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/OMA, EB/IFD; TREASURY FOR 
NLEE, RTOLOUI, LLAMONICA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, ECON, EFIN 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN AUTHORITIES REQUEST USG LOAN OF 950M FOR 
CENTRAL BANK DEBT RESTRUCTURING 
 
 
1.  Following is an unofficial Embassy translation of one of 
two letters from Dominican authorities to Treasury Under 
Secretary Taylor requesting USG assistance, received the 
 
SIPDIS 
first week of December.  Copies were faxed directly to 
Treasury and originals have been pouched. 
 
(begin text) 
 
Technical Secretariat of the Presidency 
 
No. 1831       December 5, 2003 
 
Dear Mr. Taylor: 
 
We thank you for the interest that the Government of the 
United States has shown to help us to confront the difficult 
situation the Dominican economy is going through, after the 
fraudulent failure of the largest bank in the system and the 
irregularities at two other banking institutions.  As you 
know, the rescue of the savers (depositors) by the Central 
Bank has had a cost of approximately 20 percent of GDP. 
 
To compensate for credit granted, the Central Bank had to 
emit during this year certificates that reached by the month 
of September the sum of RD$61 billion, that is to say, around 
US$1.97 billion (at the prevailing rate in that month) which 
represents for the year 2004 a quasi-fiscal deficit above 4.0 
percent of GDP. 
 
As we have opportunity to indicate to you on your recent trip 
to our country, we are close to reaching an accord with the 
International Monetary Fund over the measures that we must 
apply to confront this difficult situation, within which is 
found a strong fiscal adjustment to bring the 2004 National 
Budget into surplus, that compensates part of the 
qausi-fiscal deficit of the Central Bank. 
 
Nevertheless, in the Program to which we are agreeing with 
the IMF, the other part of the quasi- fiscal deficit of the 
Central Bank will be financed through the issuance of new 
certificates, since for the moment we cannot commit to 
totally finance this deficit through the National Budget. 
That is to say, the (quasi-fiscal deficit) is larger than 
anticipated in the Program. 
 
As such, even though the Program for 2004 agreed in principle 
with the IMF is financed, it worries us that as of now the 
said financing will be covered through an increase in the 
Central Bank certificates.   By doing this, we are creating a 
snowball.  The problem will get worse with time, and, in 
doing so, the fiscal sacrifice that we will have to make in 
future years will be ever greater. 
 
For these reasons, we repeat our request that the United 
States Government help us structure a long-term international 
economic assistance program in the amount of US$950 million. 
This would allow us to refinance 50 percent of the initial 
amount of the Central Bank certificates, and thus allow the 
fiscal adjustment to be spread out over a longer period of 
time.  This would permit a quick recovery of the national 
economy. 
 
In absence of this long term external financial help, the 
fiscal adjustment that the Dominican Government would have to 
make in the coming years would be of such magnitude that 
would provoke serious economic, social and political 
difficulties. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
(signed) 
 
Rafael Calderon                    Carlos Despradel 
Secretary of State for Finance      Technical Secretary of 
 
SIPDIS 
the Presidency 
 
(end text) 
HERTELL 
"
"12709","12/15/2003 17:42","03SANTODOMINGO7346","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 007346 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/OMA, EB/IFD; TREASURY 
FOR NLEE, RTOLOUI, LLAMONICA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, ECON, ENRG 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN AUTHORITIES REQUEST USG BRIDGE LOAN FOR 
ELECTRICITY SECTOR 
 
 
1.  Following is the unofficial Embassy translation of the 
text of a letter from the Dominican authorities to Treasury 
Under Secretary Taylor dated December 5, requested a bridge 
loan of USDOLS 60 million for the energy sector.  Copy was 
faxed to Treasury on December 5; original follows by pouch. 
 
(begin text of unofficial translation) 
 
Technical Secretariat of the Presidency 
 
No. 1832           December 5, 2003 
 
Mr 
John B Taylor 
Under Secretary for International Affairs 
Treasury Department 
Washington DC 
 
Dear Mr. Taylor: 
 
During your recent visit to our country, we had the 
opportunity to indicate to you the delicate liquidity 
situation we face in the electricity sector and the 
possibility that exists that it could produce a true crisis 
in the generation of electricity, if the recourses we await 
from the multi-lateral organizations aren,t disbursed in an 
opportune manner. 
 
As you had the opportunity to learn, the difficult electrical 
situation that our country endures is attributable to two 
fundamental problems:  first, the accumulation of various 
decades of inefficiency in the sector, whose principal 
component has been the signing of onerous generating 
contracts with private companies.  These contracts made the 
electrical energy produced in the country among the most 
expensive of the continent.  We faced this problem by 
renegotiating all of the generating contracts that the 
country had with the private companies, and we are only 
waiting for the disbursement of the $151 million form the 
World Bank, which would be used exclusively to cancel the 
said contracts through payment of stranded costs and as such 
enable the price for the sale of energy to be based on the 
spot market, as established in our Electricity Law. 
 
The second adverse factor is the impact that the high 
international petroleum prices and the strong devaluation of 
the currency (125 percent in the past 16 months) have had on 
the high cost of energy production.  We have not been able to 
entirely transfer these higher production costs to the 
consumers, especially not to those with the lowest levels of 
income.  The social effect of doing so would be devastating. 
We should remember, that from September 2002 to December 
2003, there has been a 96 percent increase in the electricity 
tariff.  Besides, the Government has established a constant 
incremental increase of four percent monthly until the tariff 
reaches the market level. 
 
Meanwhile, and to help sustain the system, the Government 
maintains a subsidy equivalent to 0.8 percent of GDP, which 
is covered by resources from the national budget. 
Nevertheless, this effort has not been sufficient, and there 
has accumulated a debt with the generators of around $200 
million this year, which has caused them to be without 
liquidity and without credit facilities to maintain their 
plants in operation. 
 
Calculations done taking a constant price of no. 6 fuel oil 
of $26 per barrel and an exchange rate of 40 pesos per dollar 
show the following shortfall between the total amount billed, 
including the Government,s subsidization and the cost of 
production of the energy service to the user.  The values are 
expressed in millions of United States dollars. 
 
                Total Cost      Total Income      Shortfall 
 
December 03       75.0        57.3              17.7 
January 04              76.3        57.2              19.1 
February 04       78.3        57.2              21.1 
March 04                80.4        57.2              23.2 
April 04                80.5        57.2              23.3 
May 04                  80.6        57.2              23.4 
June 04                 80.7        57.2              23.5 
 
Finally, we inform you that the stocks of fuel oil will run 
out around December 20 and coal supplies around December 10. 
Both combustibles generate more than 60 percent of the 
country,s electricity production.  Similarly, liquid natural 
gas (20 percent of production) will run out around January 10 
of next year. 
 
As you will be able to appreciate, it is urgent for us to 
receive a bridge loan of around $60 million dollars before 
the disbursements of the World Bank (Structural Adjustment 
Loan - $80 million) and the Inter-American Development Bank 
(Emergency Loan - $200 million), which we estimate will be 
available around the month of February, for they require not 
only the approval of the IMF, but also the approval by the 
National Congress.  Part of the resources of both loans, 
especially the first of them, would be utilized to cover the 
deficit that we have in the electrical sector. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
(signed) 
 
Rafael Calderon M.                      Carlos Despradel 
Secretary of State for Finance      Technical Secretary of 
 
SIPDIS 
the Presidency 
HERTELL 
"
"12738","12/16/2003 20:31","03SANTODOMINGO7395","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 007395 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, WHA/CAR; TREASURY FOR DO:NLEE, RTOLOUI; NSC 
FOR SHANNON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTIONS #8: MEJIA\'S PRD OPPONENTS -- 
OVERRULED OR WITHDRAWN 
 
 
1.  (SBU) Following is number 8 in our Dominican election 
series: 
 
MEJIA\'S PRD OPPONENTS -- OVERRULED OR WITHDRAWN 
 
PRD President Hatuey De Camps and a group of supporters came 
to Embassy Santo Domingo this afternoon, December 16, to say 
they expected that at 4 pm -- half an hour from now -- the 
Central Elections Board (JCE) will find against their 
convention and Hatuey\'s candidacy. This would confirm that 
the December 21 PRD \"convention\" (actually, a nationwide 
party primary), will be the vehicle to choose the PRD 
candidate.  But at 5 pm, barring unexpected developments, 
Mejia\'s three opponents will make public their own statement 
criticizing a \"distorted\" PRD voter registration roll, 
calling on Mejia to desist, and informing him that unless he 
does so, none of them will participate in the convention. 
 
So Mejia would be home free -- at least, as far as the 
renomination is concerned. 
 
These expectations are all over the Santo Domingo street. 
The afternoon paper \"El Nacional\" carries a headline, photos, 
and two interior pages on the expected development. 
According to the paper, Mejia\'s campaign manager Eligio 
Jaquez met the press this morning to tell them that Mejia 
would go solo to the December 21 convention. Jaquez said of 
Mejia, \"When he received their letter, he burst into an 
enormous chuckle.\"  Mejia\'s formal reply will be delivered 
today. 
 
\"El Nacional\" carries a sketchy account of last night\'s 
meeting of the three withdrawing leaders, which occurred in 
Esquea\'s residence.  One assertion is that of the 377,000 
names newly added to the rolls, more than 20,000 are police 
or military officers, barred by law from voting. 
 
The paper states that PRD convention organizer Secretary of 
Culture Tony Raful will meet the three withdrawing candidates 
at 5 pm for a last discussion. 
 
 
Hatuey provided a photocopy of the letter from the three. 
Following is our informal translation. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
 
December 15, 2003 
 
Ing. Agr. 
Hipolito Mejia 
President of the Republic 
 
Dear President and Comrade, 
 
As you know, we supported your presidential candidacy in the 
2000 elections, believing that one of us or another Party 
member would be your successor in the 2004-2008 government. 
 
We were immensely surprised when last April you announced 
your decision to stand for a renewed presidential candidacy, 
and, although many colleagues in the Party did not accept 
your ambition to stand again, we have been seeking solutions 
right up to the Convention  set for Sunday the 21st. 
 
Nevertheless, the organizing of this Convention has not been 
easy and there have been many difficult situations which 
threaten to cut short the Convention and submerge us in 
insoluble difficulties. 
 
To be specific, we refer to the fact that in the printed 
registry for the Convention, in a first phase nearly half a 
million electors were excluded, and, subsequently, we found 
the  the inclusion of members of the Reformed Social 
Christian Party and the Dominican Liberation Party.  The 
editions available up until today portray a status which 
distorts the participation of the PRD base, a situation in 
which it is not possible to carry out the Convention. 
 
In addition, you will be aware that as a result of your 
aspiration to run again, the Party is rapidly coming apart, a 
situation which can only be rectified if you lose the vote in 
this Convention. 
 
At the same time, you are aware of the high rate of rejection 
for re-election at this time when the country is going 
through a profound economic crisis, one which is certainly 
not exclusively your responsibility.  This economic crisis 
along with the lack of Party unity make impossible the 
victory of a re-electionist candidate.  This would leave us 
out of power and with a divided party. 
 
We have never doubted your love for the Party and your 
interest in maintaining the PRD party in government, and 
because of that we ardently petition you to desist in your 
re-election ambitions so that, through a process of 
negotiation, you and we can choose presidential and 
vice-presidential candidates.  Following this step, it would 
be sufficient to submit those proposal for ratification by 
the party faithful. 
Mr. President, comrade, we know that we are asking you to 
renounce very legitimate aspirations, but we do so inspired 
by the ideal of avoiding large national and party conflicts, 
in the conviction that you will be the great victor if those 
events can be avoided. 
 
Finally, comrade President, should this petition not be 
acceptable to you, we must inform you with great sadness that 
we would abstain from participating in the coming Convention. 
 
Fraternally yours, 
 
(signed) 
 
Dra. Milagros Ortiz Bosch 
 
Dr. Rafael Subervi onilla 
 
Dr. Emmanuel T. Esquea Guerrero 
 
2.  (U)  Draft:  Michael Meigs 
HERTELL 
"
"12753","12/17/2003 12:22","03SANTODOMINGO7406","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SANTODOMINGO7132","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 007406 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, PGOV 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION SERIES #9: AMBASSADOR DISHES 
OUT U.S. MESSAGE ON ELECTIONS WHILE PLD SERVES UP VANILLA 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 7132 
 
1. (SBU) Following is number 9 in our series on the Dominican 
elections: 
 
AMBASSADOR DISHES OUT U.S. MESSAGE ON ELECTIONS WHILE PLD 
SERVES UP VANILLA 
 
Almost two weeks ago, on December 3, the Ambassador hosted 
senior reps of the opposition Dominican Liberation Party 
(PLD) to a lunch at his residence. For the third time in a 
month, PLD candidate Leonel Fernandez declined an invitation 
because of previously scheduled travel out of the country. 
Party Secretary Reynaldo Pared Perez and the PLD\'s sole 
national senator Jose Tomas Perez led the PLD group for 
discussion with Embassy staff. For this series of party 
ecounters the Ambassador also hosted the chair of the 
Elections Monitoring Committee (Comision de Seguimento), 
Monsignor Agripino Nunez, rector at the Catholic university. 
Nunez has been mediating between the political parties and 
the Elections Board in hopes of fostering a more positive 
electoral environment. 
 
USG POSITION: NEUTRAL AND FAIR 
 
The Ambassador set forth the U.S. position on elections: we 
are neutral with regard to candidates and will work with 
whoever wins. The overriding interest of the United States is 
to see a free, fair, transparent, and clean electoral 
process.  He told PLD guests of Embassy efforts to secure 
support for election observes and of his initiative in 
getting nine other Ambassadors to visit the JCE jointly to 
express their collective concerns. The PLD representatives 
responded very positively to this and appeared relieved to 
hear it. (Persistent rumors in Santo Domingo have held that 
the Ambassador and Embassy have been working to get President 
Mejia re-elected.) 
 
PLD ELECTION CONCERNS 
 
The PLD leaders lashed out against the JCE as their \"most 
troublesome obstacle.\"  Their concern is twofold.  Six of 
nine judges are declared PRD supporters and five of those six 
are from Mejia\'s \"PPH\" faction. The PLD seriously doubts the 
judges\' ability to maintain a neutral stance or even to take 
the elections seriously.  PLD indignation was fueled by 
reports that on November 29 President Mejia had received all 
five of \"his\" JCE judges.  (JCE President Luis Arias is from 
the PRD but not from the PPH faction.) 
 
Another problem for the PLD is the issue of control of the 
computer system and the civil register.  They alleged many 
examples of young adults (those most likely to vote PLD) 
trying to register for the first time and finding their names 
already on the rolls with photos and id numbers of older 
individuals.  They asserted that the wrong polling address 
appears on more than 900,000 registration IDs (cedulas), 
potentially a tactic to confuse the vote. (The law now 
requires that each polling booth serve no more than 600 
voters, a stipulation which has led to extensive 
re-assignments.) 
 
Another cause of PLD heartburn is misuse of government 
resources in the campaign, especially with involvement of the 
military.  PLD reps said that at a recent event for army 
retirees in San Pedro de Macoris, military officers 
distributed shoes and make promises of trousers and pension 
increases if Mejia is re-elected.  Campaign director 
Francisco Garcia and SecGen Pared Perez, strongly seconded by 
others, complained about campaign activities by senior level 
military -- citing the much-discussed amateur video that 
caught Army Chief of Staff Gen. Zorrilla Ozuna handing out 
money from a PPH envelope to people on the street.  They say 
this level of military involvement has not been seen in a 
Dominican election since 1978, when Balaguer made a last, 
furious bid at re-election. 
 
Tax reform was another theme.  Citing their comments to 
Treasury Under Secretary Taylor in his encounter with 
assembled opposition representatives, they argued the need 
for fiscal reform sooner rather than later.  They doubted 
GODR bona fides in negotiations with the IMF and raised fears 
that President Mejia would let the economy continue to crash, 
leaving the next administration -- theirs -- with nothing to 
work with.  The PLD does not want to inherit a crisis of 
governability. 
NOT ANSWERING THE TOUGH QUESTIONS 
 
The Ambassador asked for PLD proposals for dealing with tough 
issues like corruption and tax reform, noting that if 
victorious, the PLD would for at least two years face a 
Congress controlled by the PRD. The guests shrugged it off -- 
Fernandez had managed through two years of congressional 
opposition and is prepared to deal with it.  During the 
Fernandez administration the GODR doubled revenue with a 
lower level of taxes than now; good management would help the 
country eventually to recover and to excel.  (The PLD is very 
willing to take full responsibility for the economic growth 
experienced during Leonel\'s administration and is currently 
running an ad campaign comparing prices of goods to those of 
today under Mejia\'s.) 
 
The PLD reaction to the issue of corruption was not as 
comfortable.  Invited by the Ambassador to set forth PLD 
proposals to reduce corruption and to deal with the financial 
crisis, they demurred with the comment that their platform 
committee will have answers to all this by the end of 
December.  (This is the second time they\'ve dodged the 
corruption issue with us.) 
 
In their summary, the PLD leaders stressed the importance of 
a USG voice in prodding all the players involved, especially 
the PRD and the Mejia administration, to play by the rules. 
 
COMMENT 
 
Recounted ten days later, this event sounds like a 
predictable exchange, even a bit dreary and unimaginative -- 
plain vanilla.  But it paid off.  The Ambassador was 
reinforcing the USG message and building trust.  The 
following week Assistant Secretary Noriega delivered the same 
message and more, big time, before the assembled Dominican 
Congress, and spoke privately to PLD Secretary General Pared 
Perez and PLD advisor Temistocles Montas in one of a series 
of contacts with the opposition.  When pushed by the press to 
express some indignation over U.S. \"interference,\" both PLD 
leaders explicitly turned down the journalists\' 
characterization. They saw no interference, in part because 
they knew the message ahead of time and they heard it again, 
in private.  And like other major political party leaders, 
they have the ear of the USG when they need it. 
HERTELL 
"
"12766","12/17/2003 15:29","03SANTODOMINGO7421","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SANTODOMINGO7395","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 007421 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, ECON, EFIN, PGOV, PREL 
SUBJECT: ASSISTANT SECRETARY NORIEGA MEETS DOMINICAN 
OPPOSITION LEADERS 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 7395 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: Visiting Assistant Secretary Roger Noriega 
on December 11 discussed the presidential election campaign 
and proposed economic reforms with leaders of major 
opposition groups, including dissident factions of the ruling 
Dominican Revolutionary Party (PRD).  He said the USG wants 
to help but they share the responsibility forconcluding an 
IMF agreement, respecting its conditions, and holding a clean 
presidential election. The USG will seek to fund 
international election observers and will not interfere in 
the election.  Opposition leaders welcomed the visit, 
criticized Mejia, and discussed policy alternatives.  The A/S 
warned the PLD against anti-United-States stances like those 
of Venezuela\'s Hugo Chavez;  PLD leaders emphasized the 
party\'s 1996-2000 record supporting democracy and free 
markets.  End summary. 
 
2. (SBU) On December 11 WHA A/S Noriega, accompanied by the 
Ambassador, DCM , WHA/CAR Deputy Director, WHA Executive 
Assistant and poloff, held separate meetings December 11 at 
the Embassy with PRSC presidential candidate Eduardo Estrella 
and vice presidential candidate/Senator Jose Hazim Frappier; 
with PRD presidential pre-candidates Vice President Milagros 
Ortiz-Bosch, Tourism Secretary Rafael \"Fello\" Subervi, and 
Enmanuel Esquea; and with PLD senior advisor Temistocles 
Montas and PLD secretary general Reinaldo Pared Perez. 
 
PRSC Candidates 
- - - - - - - - 
 
3. (SBU) PRSC presidential candidate Estrella emphasized the 
need for the Mejia administration to eliminate the 
troublesome fiscal deficit by slashing his bloated government 
payroll instead of imposing more taxes.  He said the 5 
percent tax on exports pending in Congress would act as a 
brake on economic growth.  The export tax, he said, should be 
designed to be in effect only for a defined range in the 
dollar-peso exchange, decreasing in stages when/if the dollar 
falls.  Estrella expressed his \"fear\" that the GODR would not 
comply with the conditions of a new IMF agreement.  He said a 
PRSC administration would stimulate foreign investment and 
job creation and lower interest rates.  He concurred with 
Noriega\'s emphasis on fiscal discipline. 
 
4. (SBU) Estrella advocated attacking money laundering, 
narcotrafficking, and corruption. He criticized President 
Mejia for having the Central Bank reimburse wealthy 
depositors in the BANINTER bank collapse scandal.  He 
expressed worry that the Central Election Board (JCE) might 
not be evenhanded in the upcoming election.  At a recent 
meeting in Venezuela of the Christian Democratic Organization 
of the Americas (ODCA), Estrella requested ODCA obervers for 
the Dominican election, in addition to observers from the OAS 
and other organizations that he hoped would come. 
 
PRD Pre-Candidates 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
5. (SBU) The three PRD pre-candidates planning (at that time) 
to compete in a nominating \"convention\" (primary election) 
with President Mejia, amid deep divisions in the party, told 
A/S Noriega that they want to restore their party\'s 
credibility and unify its broad base in the electorate.  Vice 
President Ortiz-Bosch advocated \"deepening the reforms\" to 
include institutional modernization, for example in 
education, rather than \"cosmetic  reforms.\"  Reforms should 
be passed before the 2006 legislative elections, while the 
PRD still controls the Congress.  She emphasized the need to 
focus public attention on general issues, such as reform, 
rather than on the short-term deterioration of salaries and 
purchasing power.  Subervi said the private sector was more 
interested in concluding an IMF accord than the government 
was.  The Assistant Secretary replied that the GODR should 
set up an information campaign to explain the IMF program to 
citizens, so as to prevent political upheaval such as that 
which occurred in Bolivia. 
 
6. (SBU) Note: Since then, all three decided to withdraw from 
competition with Mejia at the PRD convention (reftel). 
Dissident PRD candidate and PRD secretary general Hatuey De 
Camps turned down our invitation to this meeting, after 
Embassy declined his request to bring a legislator belonging 
to his faction currently serving as \"interim president\" of 
the Hatuey-organized leadership.  Poloff explained that the 
meeting was limited to candidates and pre-candidates. 
(Embassy had earlier agreed to a De Camps suggestion to 
invite another PRD pre-candidate from the Hatuey faction, 
Senator Rafael Albuquerque, but this did not materialize.) 
De Camps had attended a meeting with Treasury Under Secretary 
Taylor on November 22. 
 
PLD Representatives 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
7. (SBU) Temistocles Montas -- former technical secretary of 
the presidency during the Leonel Fernandez administration -- 
and PLD secretary general Pared Perez represented candidate 
Fernandez, who was out of the country.  They doubted that the 
JCE would organize a clean election and urged that 
international election observers from recognized entities 
such as NDI and IFES -- and, crucially, the USG -- should 
monitor the whole process, beginning in January.  They also 
raised the possibility that economic deterioration could 
trigger a political crisis, which could produce \"another 
Haiti.\"  This lends special urgency to election observation. 
 
8. (SBU) To address \"the worst economic crisis in 20-30 
years,\" the PLD leaders called for thoroughgoing reforms, not 
piecemeal measures, to avert a descent into 
\"ingovernability.\"  They want a fiscal reform, not just tax 
reform, and a refinancing of the public debt. The current 
debt service burden is unsustainable, they argued.  Debt 
renegotiation would also impose budget discipline.  The PLD 
leaders told Noriega that his presence would help ensure that 
the GODR fulfills its commitments. 
 
9. (SBU) The Assistant Secretary commented that in the heat 
of the campaign, Fernandez might be tempted to contrast his 
proposals with President Mejia\'s so-called \"neoliberal 
model.\"  Noriega warned against the temptation to take an 
anti-United-States stance for domestic political purposes. He 
pointed to the example of Venezuela\'s Hugo Chavez, who has 
polarized the situation in Venezuela at a high cost to that 
country.  Montas replied that the PLD when in office 
(1996-2000) had shown its commitment to democracy and free 
markets.  \"We want to build the type of society you have 
built in the United States,\" he emphasized.  Asked whether 
Fernandez opposes a free trade agreement with the United 
States, Montas answered, \"No, no, no.\"  Concluding the 
discussion, the Ambassador noted that he had suggested to 
Fernandez that he call on USG officials when visiting 
Washington in February. 
 
 
10. (U) This message was not reviewed by Assistant Secretary 
Noriega. 
HERTELL 
"
"12770","12/17/2003 16:19","03SANTODOMINGO7427","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SANTODOMINGO7304","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 007427 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, WHA/PA, EB; DEPT PASS USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, OVIP, EAID, DR 
SUBJECT: ASSISTANT SECRETARY NORIEGA HEARS CONCERNS OF 
DOMINICAN CIVIL SOCIETY GROUPS 
 
REF: A. A) SANTO DOMINGO 7304 
 
     B. B) SANTO DOMINGO 4249 
 
1. (U) Summary: WHA Assistant Secretary Noriega heard leaders 
of Dominican civil society groups express deep concern about 
weak institutions and the GODR\'s apparent disregard for law. 
They see risks in the presidential election process, 
especially given the politicization of the Elections Board 
and the pugnacious determination of President Mejia to be 
re-elected, perhaps at any cost.  The Assistant Secretary 
stressed U.S. interest in clean elections and impartiality 
among the candidates.  The civil society leaders requested 
continuing U.S. involvement before, during and after the May 
16 election.  End summary. 
 
2. (U) On December 11, just before his departure to call on 
the Dominican Central Elections Board (JCE), Assistant 
Secretary for Western Hemisphere Affairs (WHA) Roger Noriega 
 
SIPDIS 
spent an hour with civic society leaders from the business 
community and NGOs. 
 
3. (SBU) Speaking with the Assistant Secretary were: 
 
Monsignor Agripino Nunez Collada, Rector of the Catholic 
University (PUCMM), who heads the \"Elections Follow-up 
Commission,\" a watchdog/mediation group of notables formed 
for every national election since 1994; 
 
Elena Viyella de Paliza, President of the National Council of 
Private Enterprise (CONEP), the leading private-sector 
association in the country and an incisive voice for 
business, often critical of the Mejia administration; 
 
Celso Marranzini, businessman, President of Action for Basic 
Education, Inc. (EDUCA) and former president of CONEP, 
associated with the PLD; 
 
Frank Castillo, CONEP Executive Vice President; 
 
Marisol Vicens, President of the National Association of 
Young Entrepreneurs (ANJE), an articulate, engaged young 
lawyer; her widely reported address the previous day to the 
AmCham presented a devastating \"list of Christmas wishes\" 
that advocated replacement of the entire economic team of the 
GODR and a \"return to respect for the rule of law\"; 
 
Miriam Diaz Santana, Coordinator General of Participation 
Ciudadana (PC), a 10-year-old NGO focused on citizen 
engagement and monitoring of political process and rule of 
law; 
 
Javier Cabreja, Executive Director of PC; 
 
Juan Bolivar Diaz Santana, Member of PC; 
 
Francisco Alvarez Valdes, Member of PC who raised the issue 
of bilateral cooperation in recovering illegally acquired 
assets transferred overseas (from Baninter, for example); 
 
Fausto Rosario, Member of PC who warned that there are many 
people who do not believe in the democratic process; and 
 
Jose Alfredo Rizek, Executive Director of the Foundation for 
Institutionalism and Justice (FINJUS), the NGO that monitors 
performance of the Dominican justice system and advocates 
reform; Rizek is a full partner in the firm that employs 
Marisol Vicens (above) and writes a weekly column on judicial 
matters in leading daily \"El Caribe\". 
 
THE LONG ROAD TO A FREE AND FAIR ELECTION 
 
4. (U) Monsignor Agripino Nunez Collada, given the chance to 
open the discussion, launched into a history lesson on the 
positive effects of USG attention to the problematic 
elections of 1986, 1994, 1996 and 1998. He recalled USAID 
assistance in establishing the Central Elections Board (JCE). 
 Mons. Nunez welcomed Ambassador Hertell\'s widely publicized 
message of USG neturality in the election. \"It is evident, 
however, that political parties are using their power to 
influence the election outcome.\"  The composition of the JCE 
was voted by the Mejia-dominated legislature and was heavily 
slanted in the President\'s favor.  Of the 9 JCE judges, 6 
belong to the ruling PRD party, 5 of them to President 
Mejia\'s PPH faction.   The JCE\'s technical preparation should 
be a priority, said Nunez, but the JCE has not abided by 
certain terms of an agreement with the commission and the 
political parties on selecting technical directors of 
computer systems and identity card issuance. 
 
5. (U) Participacion Ciudadana General Coordinator Miriam 
Diaz argued that the entire electoral process is weak and 
\"the political framework in the Dominican Republic tends to 
breed dictators.\"  Diaz found President Mejia\'s bid for a 
second term in keeping with this authoritarian tradition. The 
real challenge, she contended, was establishing sustainable 
commitment to democracy.  Civil society needs international 
support to prepare for a \"time of disequilibrium in the 
Dominican Republic\".  Civil society is exasperated and 
confused by the many dire institutional issues; the bank 
failures and scandals are only one aspect of irregularities 
which cause the citizens to trust no one -- not the JCE, not 
business, not political parties and certainly not the 
government.  Mejia trails so far behind the front runner in 
the polls that many Dominicans expect his supporters to 
cheat.  In these cirumstances, the prospect of a free and 
fair presidential election is in doubt. 
 
NEED FOR CIVIC EDUCATION 
 
6. (U) CONEP President Elena Viyella, PC Executive Director 
Javier Cabreja and ANJE President Marisol Vicens each 
emphasized that most Dominicans do not understand their civic 
duties.  Viyella suggested that civil society join forces to 
launch a public education campaign (which her organization 
would support) to explain citizens\' rights, such as the right 
to vote and to be heard.  Javier Cabreja echoed that 
suggestion. He noted a direct historical link between 
political contributions and bank scandals -- events to which 
most Dominicans have simply grown accustomed.  Vicens 
lamented a lack of respect for the Constitution in a \"culture 
of lawlessness\".  As a result, citizens accept corrupt 
behavior as the norm instead of pressing for change. 
 
IT\'S THE ECONOMY ...OR IS IT? 
 
7. (U) EDUCA President Celso Marranzini and FINJUS Executive 
Director Jose Rizek agreed that the overall crisis in the 
Dominican Republic arises from institutional problems, not 
just economic factors. Marranzini blamed the GODR economic 
team for lack of coordination (ANJE President Marisol Vicens 
made a similar point, noted in para 3).  Congress got its 
share of the blame.  Marranzini and Rizek cited the August 16 
violence at the Chamber of Deputies (in which shots were 
fired to prevent a new speaker from taking office, ref B) as 
an example of weak institutions.  Rizek stressed that to 
date, patronage has always won out over institution building. 
 Social consciousness of and respect for institutions -- not 
corruption -- should be the basis on which to build a strong 
economy.  But this message has not yet reached the masses. 
 
 
8. (SBU) Assistant Secretary Noriega stressed that civil 
society participation is critical to development in any 
country, and all the more so in the Dominican Republic \"where 
the United States wants to help create a society that is 
stable, transparent and ethical.\"  The Ambassador welcomed 
ongoing collaboration with civic leaders and entrepreneurs. 
 
9. (SBU) Comment.  Civil society leaders spoke frankly and 
even harshly about the politicization of the JCE and clearly 
were worried about the potential for violence. They asked 
urgently for U.S. involvement before and during the election, 
and after the dust settles - - when a new president is 
elected and the real work of rebuilding a vulnerable society 
begins. 
 
10. (U) This message was not reviewed by Assistant Secretary 
Noriega. 
HERTELL 
"
"12774","12/17/2003 17:56","03SANTODOMINGO7429","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","03SECSTATE343274","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 007429 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), IO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/17/2008 
TAGS: PREL, KPAL, DR 
SUBJECT: GODR WILL VOTE AGAINST UNGA PALESTINIAN RESOLUTION 
ON CREDENTIALS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 343274 
 
Classified By: Ecopol Counselor Michael Meigs, Reasons 1.4 (b and d). 
 
1.  (C)  Ambassador Hertell spoke with GODR Foreign Minister 
Francisco Guerrero Prats this morning and requested the GODR 
to discourage the Palestinians from introducing a separate 
resolution in the UNGA regarding Israeli credentials.  The 
Ambassador asked if such a resolution is introduced, for the 
Foreign Minister to instruct the Dominican PermRep to the UN 
to vote against the it. Foreign Minister Prats said he was 
unaware of the vote and would discuss the matter with his 
ambassador in charge of international organizations. 
 
2.  (C)  Head of the International Organizations Desk at the 
Dominican Foreign Ministry, Ambassador Jesus Maria Hernandez, 
called Poloff shortly thereafter to report that he and 
Foreign Minister Prats had discussed the issue.  The 
Dominican PermRep has been instructed to discourage the 
introduction of a Palestinian resolution on credentials, and 
to vote against the resolution if it is introduced in the 
UNGA. 
HERTELL 
"
"12792","12/18/2003 12:10","03SANTODOMINGO7444","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 007444 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/ 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/17/2008 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, CU 
SUBJECT: ASSISTANT SECRETARY NORIEGA DISCUSSES CUBA WITH EU 
AMBASSADOR AMADO 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Hans Hertell.  Reason: 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
1.  (C) The Ambassador and Assistant Secretary Noriega 
Hertell met December 11 with the EU Ambassador to the 
Dominican Republic, Miguel Amado, who also has responsibility 
for Cuba.  Noriega expressed his hope that the USG and the EU 
could work together on Cuban issues, and emphasized our 
effort to develop strategies to respond to the inevitable 
transition of power in Cuba. 
 
2.  (C)  Amado highlighted his own efforts to bring Cuba 
under the EU,s cultural agreement umbrella with the 
Caribbean, and possibly to open a EU \"Cuba office\" in Santo 
Domingo.   Amado had been working hard to encourage Cuba to 
agree to a program that included a seminar on trade, a 
dialogue with dissidents, a dialogue with Castro,s technical 
people, and cultural activities. 
 
3.  (C)  Amado felt he had been making progress until the 
EU,s criticism of Castro,s handling of dissidents.  Now, he 
said, Castro has begun to attack European leaders and has 
played on European weakness to divide the EU into several 
camps.  This divide has been critical in light of the scant 
attention that the EU pays Cuba, even in the best of times. 
Progress has been suspended for the time being. 
 
4.  (C)  That said, Amado has not given up all hope.  He told 
A/S Noriega and the Ambassador that he was trying to get the 
Church more involved. 
 
5.  (C)  Comment:  Amado, with a creative approach, has been 
a driver of thinking in the EU on how to deal with Cuba.  He 
retains a keen interest in seeing political and economic 
reforms in Cuba, and as such, is an valuable ally for our 
efforts to bring about needed reform in Cuba. 
HERTELL 
"
"12830","12/19/2003 11:16","03SANTODOMINGO7456","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SANTODOMINGO7134","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 007456 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: ASSISTANT SECRETARY NORIEGA GETS IMF READOUT ON 
DOMINICAN NEGOTIATIONS 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 7134 
 
 1.  (SBU) Summary: In a December 11 meeting, International 
Monetary Fund representatives told WHA Assistant Secretary 
Noriega that they were close to agreement on a new IMF 
program for the Dominican Republic, but expressed concern 
that recent steps by Mejia to \"talk down\" the exchange rate 
could stall negotiations.  Though agreement was close on 
fiscal reforms, managing the ballooning quasi-fiscal deficit 
and tightening monetary policy deficit will be difficult. 
The Fund representatives said a deal would be fragile.  At a 
separate meeting, private sector representatives pointed to 
the confrontational atmosphere between business and 
government.  They criticized the GODR for excessive spending, 
corruption, and weak banking supervision.  They decried 
reports of new tax proposals under the prospective IMF 
agreement. End Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) Assistant Secretary for Western Hemisphere Affairs 
(WHA) Roger Noriega met with IMF Senior Advisor Rangid Teja, 
Division/Mission Chief Marcelo Figuerola, Deputy Division 
Chief Steven Phillips and Temporary resident Representative 
Ousmene Mandeng December 11 to hear the Fund\'s views on 
current negotiations of a new Standby Agreement and to urge 
support for quick disbursement of International Financial 
Institution (IFI) loans once a program is in place. 
Ambassador Hertell, DCM, Treasury desk Officer and emboffs 
participated in the meeting.  A/S Noriega heard private 
sector views at a luncheon with prominent local business 
leaders representing banking, industry, energy, tourism and 
free zone sectors. 
 
QUALITY OF FISCAL ADJUSTMENT LOW 
 
3.  (SBU) IMF Senior Advisor Teja reported substantial 
progress in the negotiations, noting that they were close to 
agreement on a fiscal package, but cautioned that the quality 
of the fiscal adjustment was \"low.\"  Teja said that the 
revenue measures in particular were weak and probably not 
sustainable.  However, he added, under the current economic 
and political circumstances, the measures were probably as 
good as the GODR could achieve, and  they would serve as a 
\"stop-gap,\" pending more comprehensive fiscal reform.  He 
said that the GODR needed to remove exemptions currently in 
effect (for items such as medicines and school supplies). 
Teja said that 80 percent of the fiscal adjustment would come 
from spending cuts. 
 
ELECTRICITY A CONCERN 
 
4.  (SBU)  Fund representatives noted that the one of the 
\"good measures\" in the prospective agreement was partial 
elimination of electricity subsidies.  Currently, the GODR 
provides a subsidy to all consumers for the first 300 kw of 
electricity consumed each month. Under a new proposal, the 
GODR would subsidize only customers who use less than 200 
kw/month.  The GODR would also impose tariff increases on all 
users who exceed the 200 mw ceiling.  Teja projected that 
reduction in subsidies, when implemented, would allow the 
distributors to meet fuel-purchase needs in the short term, 
but would not be sufficient to amortize accumulated arrears. 
Responding to a question about reports from generators that 
fuel supplies would be depleted by late December, Teja said 
that the Fund had been in contact with the World Bank 
concerning a short-term strategy to \"keep the lights on.\" 
However Teja commented that the IMF team were on shaky ground 
with regard to immediate World Bank assistance.  It might be 
that the GODR needed to look for other possibilities. 
 
YES, NEW TAXES 
 
5.  (SBU)  The officials from the Fund confirmed that the 
GODR would propose a series of additional tax measures, 
including a five-percent export tax, a two-percent import tax 
and an excise tax on alcohol and tobacco.  These taxes are in 
addition to a doubling of an \"exchange rate\" tax (based on 
import values stated on invoices), from 4.75 percent to 10 
percent; an increase in airport departure fees (from USD 10 
to USD 20); and a .15 percent check cashing fee.  The 
government had previously tried to implement the export tax 
by presidential decree, but the Supreme Court ruled that 
taxes could be levied only by congress.  Nevertheless, the 
GODR has continued to collect the two-percent export tax, as 
well as the check-cashing and airport fees that were 
implemented by the Monetary Board. 
 
THE QUASI-FISCAL DEFICIT 
 
6.  (SBU) The IMF has identified the ballooning amount of 
Central Bank short-term debt certificates and the 
corresponding increase in the quasi-fiscal deficit as a 
crucial issues for the GODR.  Teja said that the GODR started 
paying out cash in November to meet interest payments on 
certificates and stressed the need for the GODR to slow 
monetary growth.  The Fund did not offer details of how the 
GODR might manage the Central Bank certificates, but 
commented that Paris Club rescheduling could provide some 
relief. 
 
EXCHANGE RATE POLICY 
 
7.  (SBU) Teja said that the President\'s recent appointment 
of a commission to undertake vigorous enforcement in the 
exchange market (reftel), had become a very important issue 
that could delay the agreement.  He said that a specialist 
from the Fund had just arrived in the country to study the 
matter.  Teja explained that taken individually, none of the 
statements or actions taken by the GODR with regard to the 
exchange rate would be cause for concern -- \"however, the 
totality of the picture is intimidation.\"  He noted a sharp 
reduction in trading and suggested that the recent arrests of 
illegal exchange traders were intended to preclude emergence 
of a black market. 
 
 PRIVATE SECTOR CONCERNS 
 
8.  (SBU) In a lunch with the Assistant Secretary earlier the 
same day prominent representatives of the private sector 
agreed that there was a crisis of confidence in the 
government and expressed doubt about the efficacy of an IMF 
program.  They pointed to the upcoming elections and the 
dramatic growth in the budget under the Mejia administration. 
 One interlocutor remarked that the GODR would agree to an 
IMF program now, but by February it would exceed fiscal 
targets due to spending on reelection of Mejia.  He said that 
the USG should tell Mejia to set aside ambitions for 
re-election for the good of the country. 
 
9.  (SBU) Several of the businesspeople attending the lunch 
spoke out forcefully against the various tax proposals under 
consideration.  They said the five-percent export tax, in 
particular, would have a devastating effect on the 
manufacturing sector, but suggested that the GODR was 
incapable of enforcing other forms of taxation.  Elena 
Viyella, the vocal president of the Association of 
Entrepreneurs (CONEP), said that exporters would support a 
tax of 2.5 percent. 
 
10. (SBU) The group was also critical of the government\'s 
handling of the banking crisis that led to the present 
economic crisis.  They said the GODR violated its own banking 
laws by bailing out a small number of large investors, and 
said that banking supervision was very weak, with no clear 
authority.  One member participant expressed serious 
reservations about the  Systemic Risk Law the GODR has 
submitted to Congress.  Although passage of the law is a 
precondition of an IMF agreement, she noted that it gave too 
much power to the Executive Branch and did not provide 
penalties for illegal banking acts.  Some members of the 
group expressed skepticism about the President\'s comments 
directed at lowering the peso/dollar exchange rate.  They 
said that similar efforts had failed twice before in this 
country, in the 1980s.  They seemed to agree that there was a 
real danger the peso could fall further and that the GODR 
might use \"boots and guns\" next time. 
 
COMMENT 
 
11.  (SBU) The GODR is facing complex economic challenges and 
has few options other than a Fund agreement.  The GODR is 
likely to continue to press to meet conditions for quick 
disbursement of IFI loans.  Passage of the budget appears 
likely, despite substantial private sector opposition to the 
proposed tax measures.  Though the private sector 
acknowledges the need for the IMF, it has a visceral distrust 
of this government. 
 
HERTELL 
"
"12831","12/19/2003 11:18","03SANTODOMINGO7458","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE310954","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 SANTO DOMINGO 007458 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/MTA/MST 
STATE PASS TO USTR FOR G. BLUE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, ETRD, EINV 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 2004 NATIONAL TRADE ESTIMATE 
REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 310954 
 
1. The following updates the National Trade Estimate Report 
for the Dominican Republic as requested by Reftel for 2004. 
 
TRADE SUMMARY 
 
For January through September of 2003, the United States had 
a trade deficit with the Dominican Republic of $112 million, 
a deterioration of $263 million from the $151 million surplus 
for the same period of 2002.  U.S. goods exports to the 
Dominican Republic were $3.2 billion, a decrease of $39 
million from the same period last year.  Corresponding U.S. 
imports from the Dominican Republic were $3.3 billion, an 
increase of $224 million.  The shift in the trade balance is 
primarily the result of the depreciation of the peso, which 
lost half of its value against the dollar in 2003.  The 
Dominican Republic is currently the fifth largest export 
market for U.S. goods in the Western Hemisphere. 
 
The United States has announced its intent to launch 
negotiations with the Dominican Republic in January 2004. 
The objective of those negotiations is to integrate the 
Dominican Republic into the Central American Free Trade 
Agreement (CAFTA) that is expected to conclude by the end of 
2003. 
 
According to the Dominican Central Bank statistics, the stock 
of U.S. foreign direct investment (FDI) in the Dominican 
Republic in 2002 amounted to $1.5 billion, an increase of 
$748 million over U.S. FDI in 2001, $752 million.  For 
January through September of 2003, Dominican Central Bank 
figures show U.S. FDI increased at $245 million.  U.S. FDI in 
the Dominican Republic is concentrated largely in the 
manufacturing, energy, and banking sectors. 
 
Much of the U.S. investment in the manufacturing sector is 
located in export processing zones, called Free Trade Zones 
(FTZ), where apparel, footwear, electronic products and 
medical goods are assembled from U.S. components and 
materials and then exported back to the United States. 
 
IMPORT POLICIES 
 
Tariffs 
 
As a result of a progressive deterioration in the Dominican 
economy during the second half of 2003, the Dominican 
government has requested assistance from the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF).  As part of the initial agreement 
reached with the IMF, the Dominican Government ordered the 
application of a two-percent surcharge on the CIF value of 
all imports.  Decree 646-03 establishes that goods that have 
been exempt from taxes and surcharge under free trade 
agreements will not pay the new surcharge.  The decree does 
not mention if FTZ items are exempt, although previous 
statements from the government indicate the surcharge would 
affect free zone imports.  (The government is also seeking to 
implement a 5 percent export tax as part of a revised IMF 
agreement under negotiation. 
 
Non-tariff Measures 
 
The government of the Dominican Republic imposes a selective 
consumption tax ranging from 15 percent to 60 percent on 
&nonessential8 products such as home appliances, alcohol, 
perfumes, jewelry, automobiles and auto parts.  The United 
States has raised concerns about the possible discriminatory 
effect of the application of this tax on distilled spirits, 
because the tax on cane-based spirits (nearly all of which is 
domestically produced) is 35 percent, while the tax assessed 
on non-cane based spirits (much of which is imported) is 45 
percent.  Additionally, U.S. companies have complained that 
the Dominican Republic applies a differential &adjustment 
factor,8 depending on the category of spirit, upon which the 
ad valorem consumption tax is levied. 
 
Bringing goods through Dominican Customs can often be a slow 
and arduous process.  Customs Department interpretations 
often provoke complaints by businesspersons, and arbitrary 
clearance procedures sometimes delay the importation of 
merchandise for lengthy periods.  Furthermore, the Dominican 
government continues to require importers to obtain from a 
Dominican Consulate in the United States a consular invoice 
and &legalization8 of documents, with attendant fees and 
delays.  The use of &negotiated fee8 practices to gain 
faster customs clearance continues to put some U.S. firms at 
a competitive disadvantage in the Dominican market. 
In anticipation of the signing of a second IMF stand-by 
agreement, and in an effort to raise badly needed revenue, 
the Dominican government increased the exchange surcharge 
(Recargo Cambiario) from 4.75 percent to 10 percent. 
Dominican Customs collects the Cambiario, which is a tax 
imposed on the invoice dollar amounts of all imports into the 
Dominican Republic.  The Cambiario was initially supposed to 
be gradually phased down according to the Monetary and 
Financial Law No. 183-02 (Nov. 21, 2002).  On October 23, 
2003, the Central Bank issued a resolution increasing the 
Cambiario to 10 percent and delaying the phase out until 
February 2004 or when macroeconomic conditions were stable. 
This resolution was implemented on November 3, 2003. 
 
The Dominican government implemented the WTO Agreement on 
Customs Valuation in July 2001 following a 16-month extension 
granted by the WTO Committee on Customs Valuation. It has 
notified its implementing legislation to the WTO. In October 
2001, the Dominican Republic was granted a waiver that 
permits continued use of reference prices on over two-dozen 
categories of goods that expired on July 1, 2003.  A new 
waiver has not been granted. 
 
Sanitary permits are required for the importation of many 
agricultural products.  In practice, these sanitary permits 
are used as import licenses to control import levels of 
selected commodities and products.  The inability to apply 
for and receive sanitary permits in a timely manner in the 
Dominican Republic for shipments of U.S. meat and dairy 
products continues to be a serious problem for U.S. export 
companies and Dominican importers.  This is a result of a 
continuing policy by the General Directorate of Livestock 
within the Ministry of Agriculture to delay or reject 
applications for sanitary permits, based on its assessment of 
market needs and the effect imports would have on domestic 
producers. 
 
The trade-restrictive actions of the Livestock Directorate 
fall into two main areas: absorption requirements and lack of 
transparency. 
 
Absorption Requirements 
 
Absorption requirements, which require an importer to 
purchase specified quantities of domestic products in order 
to import those same types of products, were to be 
eliminated.  However, U.S. companies indicate that the 
Livestock Directorate is requiring importers to purchase 25 
percent of their requirements for turkeys from domestic 
sources, in order to receive sanitary permits. 
 
Transparency 
 
The current process for granting sanitary permits is 
arbitrary, with applications for permits being rejected or 
subject to lengthy delays, with little or no explanation and 
no apparent basis in Dominican law.  This is especially a 
problem for products with a short shelf life, such as yogurt, 
which could quickly pass its expiration date if delayed in 
port.  Some U.S. companies have reported that they are no 
longer attempting to export to the Dominican Republic because 
of financial losses and frustration from previous attempts to 
obtain import permits. 
 
U.S. companies have also expressed concern that the Dominican 
Dealer Protection Law 173, which applies only to foreign and 
not domestic suppliers, makes it extremely difficult to 
terminate contracts with local agents or distributors without 
paying exorbitant indemnities.  Several U.S. companies have 
lost lawsuits brought under this law and have suffered 
significant financial penalties.  This law has had a negative 
impact on market access and on consumer welfare in the 
Dominican Republic. 
 
STANDARDS, TESTING, LABELING AND CERTIFICATION 
 
The Dominican Republic generally accepts U.S. certifications 
and standards.  U.S. agricultural exports are sometimes 
subject to sanitary and phytosanitary measures that appear to 
be arbitrarily enforced and not based on science. 
 
GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT 
 
There is no explicit &buy national8 policy; however, 
government procurement is often conducted without benefit of 
open bidding.  The processes by which contractors and/or 
suppliers are chosen are often opaque.  The Dominican 
Republic is still not a signatory of the WTO Agreement on 
Government Procurement.   The United States lifted its 
suspension of a waiver under the &Buy America Act8 in 2003 
after the Dominican government increased its cooperation in 
the World Trade Organization Working Party on Transparency in 
Government Procurement, which was based partly on legislation 
presented to the Dominican Congress to make government 
procurement more transparent.  The law has not yet been 
approved. 
 
EXPORT SUBSIDIES 
 
The Dominican Republic does not have aggressive 
export-promotion schemes other than the exemptions given to 
firms in the free trade zones.  A tax rebate scheme designed 
to encourage exports has been considered a failure. 
 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS (IPR) PROTECTION 
 
The Dominican government took steps to strengthen its 
intellectual property rights regime during 2003, and as a 
result, the United States improved the country,s standing 
under Special 301 from &priority watchlist8 to 
&watchlist.8  Although the Dominican Republic has strong 
legislation to protect copyrights and has improved the 
regulatory framework for patent and trademark protection, 
United States industry representatives continue to cite lack 
of IPR enforcement as a major concern.  The government has 
taken some steps to prosecute violators, however, there is 
insufficient training or resources for enforcement, and the 
judicial process moves very slowly.  The Dominican Republic 
recently ratified the WIPO Copyright Treaty and has submitted 
the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty to Congress for 
ratification. 
 
Patents and Trademarks 
 
The government passed regulatory measures in 2003 that appear 
to significantly strengthen the Industrial Property Law 
passed in 2000 and bring the law into compliance with Trade 
Related Aspects of Intellectual Property (TRIPS) under the 
WTO.  However, the new regulations have not yet been applied 
in legal proceedings, so the effectiveness of those measures 
has not been tested. 
 
Copyrights 
 
Despite a new, TRIPS-compliant copyright law passed in 2000 
and some improvement in enforcement activity, piracy of 
copyrighted materials is still widespread. Video and audio 
recordings and software are being copied without 
authorization despite the government,s efforts to seize and 
destroy such pirated goods. The United States Government 
continues to receive serious reports of television and cable 
operators rebroadcasting signals without compensating either 
the original broadcaster or the originator of the recording. 
U.S. industry representatives point to extended delays in the 
judicial process when cases are submitted for prosecution. 
 
SERVICES BARRIERS 
 
In October 2002, the Dominican Republic passed a new monetary 
and financial law that provides for national treatment of 
investors in most of the financial services sector.  The law 
establishes a regulatory regime for monetary and financial 
institutions, and provides for participation of foreign 
investment in financial intermediary activities in the 
Dominican Republic. 
 
It is not clear at this time what long-term effects the Banco 
Intercontinental (Baninter) bank fraud scandal will have on 
financial services sector investment.  The fraud resulted in 
an estimated $2.2 billion loss, equivalent to roughly 12-15 
percent of GDP.  The Dominican government chose to guarantee 
all deposits, even though the banking law sets a relatively 
low ceiling for government guarantees of bank deposits. 
Since the Baninter scandal, the government has intervened in 
two other Dominican banks that became insolvent, BanCredito 
and Banco Mercantil.  The Dominican Republic,s Leon Jimenez 
Group subsequently purchased BanCredito, and Republic Bank, 
based in Trinidad & Tobago, acquired Banco Mercantil. 
 
Although the Dominican Republic has not yet ratified the 1997 
WTO Financial Services Agreement the new monetary and 
financial law appears to go beyond the commitments of the WTO 
agreement.  The Dominican Republic has committed itself to 
allow foreign banks to establish branches or local companies 
with up to 100 percent foreign equity to supply 
deposit-taking, lending, and credit card services.  Foreign 
investors could also own up to 100 percent equity in local 
suppliers of leasing and insurance service suppliers.  There 
is no longer any need for local participation. 
 
The Dominican Insurance Law remains unchanged requiring that 
Dominican shareholders hold at least 51 percent of the shares 
of national insurance companies. 
 
INVESTMENT BARRIERS 
 
Dominican legislation does not contain effective procedures 
for settling disputes arising from Dominican Government 
actions.  Dominican expropriation standards are not 
consistent with international law standards; several 
investors have outstanding disputes related to expropriated 
property.  Subsequent to U.S.-Dominican Trade and Investment 
Council meetings in October 2002, the Government set out to 
examine outstanding expropriation cases for possible 
resolution through payment or issuance of government bonds 
under a 1999 law.  With the help of a USAID contractor, the 
Boston Institute for Developing Economies (BIDE), the 
Dominican government has been able to identify analyze 245 
cases and has sent to and received approval for 188 (76.7%) 
by the Debt Commission.  The remaining cases will be sent to 
the next Debt Commission meeting, which has yet to be set. 
 
The Dominican Republic implemented the New York Convention on 
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (the 
New York Convention) in August of 2002, which provides courts 
a mechanism to enforce international arbitral awards. 
 
In 1999, capitalization of the state electric company left 
control of the distribution system and most generating 
capacity in private hands.  In 2002, the Dominican government 
reached agreement to renegotiate most of the contracts with 
independent power producers (IPP) and established a new 
agreement with the distributors on collection and payment 
mechanisms, as well as rate structure.  In 2003, however, the 
electricity sector in the Dominican Republic began to 
deteriorate.  The crisis in the sector is primarily due to 
distributor,s inability to collect sufficient funds from 
consumers and the Dominican Government, and the pricing 
formula that distributors must use to convert dollar-indexed 
tariffs into peso charges to their customers, which has been 
exacerbated by the devaluation of the peso.  The total amount 
owed in payment arrears to the generators and distributors 
exceeds USD 350 million, and continues to grow.  In 
September, the government surprised many observers by 
re-purchasing Spanish firm Union Fenosa,s share of two 
distributors (EDENORTE and EDESUR).  The buyout resulted in a 
suspension of the IMF stand-by agreement that had been agreed 
in August.  Electrical sector problems threaten the economic 
competitiveness and have the potential to spark further 
social unrest in the Dominican Republic. 
 
 
LACK OF GOVERNMENT ACTION AGAINST ANTI-COMPETITIVE PRACTICES 
 
The Dominican Republic does not have a well-developed legal 
framework against anti-competitive practices.  There have 
been no reported incidents in which a U.S. firm has initiated 
legal action against a state-owned or private company for 
practices that restricted the sale of U.S. products or 
services. 
TRADE RESTRICTIONS AFFECTING ELECTRONIC COMMERCE 
 
Embassy is not aware of specific legislation or taxes that 
apply to electronic commerce.  However, shipping costs, 
difficulties with the postal system and customs, and import 
duties are practical constraints to e-commerce. 
 
OTHER BARRIERS 
 
U.S. companies continue to complain about lack of 
transparency and corruption in all sectors.  Lack of 
predictability in the judicial process also presents problems 
for U.S. companies seeking to resolve contract disputes.  The 
Dominican Republic also has a dealer protection law that 
imposes financial penalties on foreign companies that 
terminate agreements with local distributors. 
HERTELL 
"
"12837","12/19/2003 12:38","03SANTODOMINGO7469","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 007469 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/IFD; TREASURY FOR 
DO:NLEE, RTOLOUI, LLAMONICA; NSC FOR SHANNON, HCRUZ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, EFIN 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: IMF RESREP ON TECHNICAL 
AGREEMENT, PARIS CLUB, TIMING 
 
REF: PIERCE/LAMONICA TELCON 12-18 
 
1.  IMF ResRep Ousmene Mendeng (PLEASE PROTECT) confirmed to 
USAID Director and EcoPol counselor on December 18 that local 
press reports are generally accurate concerning the elements 
of the technical agreement with the IMF.  The agreed overall 
deficit target is 3.5 pct of GDP.  (Note: press on December 
19 mentions a 25 percent tax on certificates held at the 
Central Bank by savings and loans associations -- presumably 
a withholding tax on income from those certificates.) 
 
2.  The GODR met the targets principally by adjusting 
expenditure.  To some degree this includes slowing or 
stopping foreign-financed development projects. 
 
3.  Electricity subsidies will be reduced somewhat by the 
\"staged\" pricing structure for power:  no adjustment of price 
on the first 200 kw, a monthly adjustment of 4 pct on the 
tranche from 200-400 kw, and an 8 pct monthly adjustment on 
amounts above 400 kw. 
 
4.  There is no explicit revenue target; rather the agreement 
is that total non-financial public sector deficit (including 
agencies such as those handling electricity distribution) 
will be 1.5 percent of GDP.  There is an expenditure cap on 
the central government.  The central government surplus will 
be equivalent to 1 percent of GDP. 
 
FINANCE 
 
5.  Summarizing likely financing: 
 
- - World Bank financing is at a USD 120 million baseline: 20 
million in technical assistance and 100 million in 
fast-disbursing (\"emergency\") funds. Another USD 150 million 
for electricity sector restructuring may be available later 
in the year if everything else goes \"perfectly smoothly.\" 
 
- - IDB will provide USD 200 million in an emergency loan and 
USD 100 million for the social sector. 
 
- - Assuming bilateral assistance is approximately as before, 
these flows might provide USD 100 million, some of it in debt 
relief. 
 
- - Debt service for the year will be USD 800-850 million. 
More than 50 pct of this is due to the U.S.  Spain is the 
other major bilateral creditor. 
 
Once all sums are done, a financing gap of USD 300 million 
remains. 
 
PARIS CLUB 
 
6.  In order to meet the financing gap, a Paris Club 
rescheduling has already been initiated, at GODR insistence. 
The ResRep expects that the value for 2004 of a Paris Club 
rescheduling could be about 12 billion pesos (USD 300 
million). 
 
7.  The rescheduling would include Paris Club bilateral debt, 
Paris Club non-bilateral, and commercial creditors.  The 
Paris Club rescheduling will probably involve USD 125 million 
and rescheduled arrears of another USD 80 million.  Amounts 
rescheduled are determined by the cutoff date for 
rescheduling (1984?) agreed in previous PC exercises. 
Rescheduling with commercial creditors would provide about 
USD 100 million. 
 
8.  For commercial debt, the GODR and IMF are trying to find 
a formula whereby the Eurobonds are not rescheduled.  They 
might seek to reschedule only amount of the principal. 
 
9.  The Fund staff accepted the Paris Club approach only if 
used as an additional measure intended to reduce Central Bank 
holdings of debt certificates.   The GODR is to obtain a 
Paris Club rescheduling and must maintain the equivalent of 
the rescheduled amounts in the Central Bank.  In effect, this 
will allow the CB to lower its issuance of short-term debt 
paper.  Since the \"effort\" is in pesos, this arrangement will 
be advantageous in that the GODR will not have to go to the 
market to obtain dollars for these payments. 
 
TIMETABLE 
 
10.  The ResRep said the GODR informed the Paris Club on 
December 9 of its desire to reschedule.  By the next Paris 
Club meeting on January 14, a reply will be required.  The 
timing is tricky; the Paris Club agreement is a requisite of 
the agreement, but Paris Club donors require the assurance of 
an agreement with the Fund.  In essence, coordination is 
necessary for simultaneous engagements.  Actual restructuring 
negotiations with the Paris Club would take place in 
March-April. 
 
CONDITIONS 
 
11. Conditionalities prior to announcement of an agreement: 
 
-- the 2004 GODR budget must be approved by Congress, 
including required revenue measures. 
 
-- a financial stabilization plan for the electricity sector 
must be agreed with the World Bank (WB is about to issue a 
note on policy development for the sector). 
 
-- the GODR must assure that the foreign exchange market will 
operate freely. 
 
-- Base money must be in line with program targets.  This 
will not be easy.  At yesterday,s CB auction only about half 
of the paper was taken;  there were few takers last week. 
The important point is that the GODR must make an effort to 
control the monetary base and must achieve an \"inflection 
point\" showing that effective action has begun to control 
monetary growth, which recently has been rapid. 
 
-- Paris Club assurance of re-financing.  If IMF management 
requires a formal assurance from the PC, not possible before 
January 14th; if an informal assurance is sufficient, 
indications to the Fund from the U.S. and Spain might allow 
management to be flexible. 
 
12. Once the above is met, the announcement will be made and 
documents will be circulated for a late January IMF board 
meeting. 
 
13. Further conditionalities to be met prior to IMF board 
approval: 
 
--  GODR must clear non-reschedulable arrears in external 
debt, currently totaling about  USD 63 million (IMF is asking 
that these be reduced in December by USD 25-27 million to 
about USD 40 million). 
 
-- Note that debt payments subject to PC rescheduling will 
grow to USD 90 million in December. 
 
-- GODR must meet the conditonalities previously established. 
 
14.  USAID Director noted possible problems arising if U.S. 
sanctions are incurred when bilateral debt is more than 60 
days in arrears.  IMF ResRep inquired whether a Paris Club 
announcement of an intent reschedule might obviate these 
concerns. 
 
15.  Projections for economy are for contraction of 1.3 
percent of GDP in 2003, 1.0 percent contraction in 2004. 
End-of-period inflation is projected to be 14 percent, which 
ResRep finds \"very optimistic.\" 
 
16.  Comment.  Emboffs find that the program as described is 
tight, subject to possible disruption at any of a number of 
points in the program and calendar.  We understand that the 
GODR was firm in choosing to approach the Paris Club, rather 
than seeking further IFI financing during the year.  Our 
World Bank contacts were unaware - - until we spoke to them 
today - - of the requirement for a financial stability plan 
for the electricity sector prior to proceeding to the IMF 
board.  It is not yet clear how elaborate this plan would 
have to be to meet IMF requirements. 
 
17.  Footnote: Calculations for the program were done with RD 
40 = USD 1 but ResRep comments that this is simply an 
accounting convenience.  GODR debits and credits in dollars 
are relatively balanced, so the actual rate probably does not 
have a great effect. 
 
HERTELL 
"
"12851","12/19/2003 23:25","03SANTODOMINGO7489","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 007489 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR-SMITH, WHA/PPC-NOYES, AND DRL/PHD-DAVIS 
STATE PASS AID 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, PGOV, PHUM, PREL 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTIONS #10: ASSISTANT SECRETARY 
NORIEGA MEETS ELECTION BOARD 
 
REF: A. REF: (A0 SANTO DOMINGO 7395 (NOTAL) 
 
     B. (B) SANTO DOMINGO 6379 (NOTAL) 
 
1. (U) Following is number 10 in our Dominican presidential 
election series: 
 
ASSISTANT SECRETARY NORIEGA PLUGS CLEAN ELECTIONS -- 
DOMINICAN ELECTION BOARD ASSERTS THEY WILL BE 
 
2. (SBU) Summary: Visiting WHA Assistant Secretary Noriega, 
with the Ambassador and other U.S. officials, called on the 
three presiding judges of the Dominican Republic\'s Central 
Election Board (JCE) December 11.  The Assistant Secretary 
expressed concern about low public confidence in the fairness 
of the presidential election process and said the USG stood 
ready to support the JCE\'s declared goal of ensuring free, 
fair, transparent, and clean elections, including funding for 
international election observers.  The judges acknowledged 
that democracy and the JCE\'s credibility were at stake.  They 
said logistical arrangements for the May 16 voting would be 
completed this month, and voting abroad would be possible for 
the first time.  The JCE was planning workshops for election 
officials and university training for poll workers, and was 
coordinating closely with political parties and civil 
society.  JCE President Luis Arias said international 
observers would be invited soon, and he welcomed public 
support and comment on the electoral process by diplomats in 
country.  Paragraph 11 repeats Embassy\'s request for funding 
of observers.  End summary. 
 
3. (SBU) Visiting Assistant Secretary of State for Western 
Hemisphere Affairs Noriega on December 11 met with the 
Dominican Republic\'s Central Election Board (JCE) Plenary 
presiding judge Luis Arias, Administrative Chamber presiding 
judge Nelson Gomez, and Dispute Resolution Chamber presiding 
judge Salvador Ramos.  The Ambassador, DCM Kubiske, WHA/CAR 
deputy director Smith, WHA executive assistant Friedman, and 
poloff accompanied the Assistant Secretary. 
 
U.S. Interest 
- - - - - - - 
 
4. (SBU) Assistant Secretary Noriega expressed concern about 
the Dominican presidential election process, which is getting 
underway during chaotic economic and financial circumstances. 
 He noted doubts among many Dominicans about the fairness of 
the presidential election process.  To help counter this low 
public confidence, he said the USG stood ready to support the 
JCE\'s declared goal of ensuring free, fair, transparent, and 
clean elections, including funding for international election 
observers.  The Assistant Secretary, based on his personal 
experience in observing elections in various countries, 
emphasized the JCE\'s crucial role in organizing an election 
that is free, fair, clean, and transparent.  To build 
confidence, the JCE should do this in dialogue with the 
political parties and civil society, which also have 
responsibilities in ensuring an environment conducive to a 
credible election. 
 
JCE\'s Credibility at Stake 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
5. (SBU) JCE Plenary presiding judge Arias replied that the 
Election Board would welcome as many international observers 
as necessary to achieve that goal.  The JCE\'s interest was to 
promote democracy, the credibility of institutions including 
the electoral arrangements, and the personal and professional 
credibility of the prominent jurists on the JCE.  Arias said 
the JCE would demonstrate its capability and will to ensure a 
clean and transparent process.  Electoral fraud, he asserted, 
was \"an issue of the past.\"  The political parties had 
permenant representatives to the JCE, and the Board was 
keeping them informed of every step in the process. 
 
Logistical Preparation Nearly Finished 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
6. (SBU) JCE Administrative Chamber judge Gomez said all the 
arrangements for the election would be completed by the end 
of December, including agreement with political delegates on 
the composition of all municipal election boards.  Gomez 
anticipated that from January to April, during the campaign, 
the JCE would make adjustments to the process based on 
suggestions from the political parties and non-partisan NGOs 
(Note:  Such as the USAID-supported Participacion Ciudadana. 
End note.).  He said the JCE\'s computer system would enable 
announcement of the winner within three to four hours of the 
closing of the polls, reducing suspicions that arose in the 
past from extended vote counts.  (Comment: Based on 
historical experience, we doubt that the winner can be 
determined so quickly.  End comment.) 
 
7. (SBU) Gomez described planned fraud-prevention 
improvements: The hand-written ballot box counts from each 
polling table would be sealed in plastic to prevent 
alteration before they are entered in computers, each 
political party would receive signed copies, and the computer 
keypunchers would not know which candidate\'s returns they 
were entering.  Gomez said the JCE had resolved a dispute 
with the parties and an Election Follow-Up Commission of 
civil society representatives over the impartiality of the 
JCE\'s computer director by appointing a recognized computer 
expert with no party connections as the general administrator 
of data processing.  (Comment:  The JCE and Follow-Up 
Commission are still negotiating on acceptable job 
descriptions of these two officials.  End comment.) 
 
8. (SBU)  Gomez also claimed that, of 5.1 million voters 
nationwide, 5,053,000 already had valid i.d. cards (cedulas) 
to enable them to vote, and that new computer equipment being 
installed at JCE offices would enable the remaining 47,000 
voters to obtain their cedulas.  (Comment:  Our 
non-government contacts have told us that thousands of the 
existing i.d. cards have errors that could pose obstacles to 
voters on election day.  The JCE has previously said publicly 
and privately that it is taking corrective measures.  End 
comment.)  For the longer run, President Mejia has approved a 
JCE proposal to request assistance from international 
financial institutions to modernize the entire Dominican i.d. 
card system, to eliminate chronic problems.  The JCE 
estimates this project will require 10-12 million U.S. 
dollars.  The JCE\'s tentatively approved budget, about 1.6 
billion pesos of 1.8 billion requested, deletes funding for 
civil registry modernization. 
 
Resolving Election Disputes 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
9. (SBU) Dispute Resolution Chamber judge Ramos described the 
JCE\'s plans to train local election officials and poll 
workers, to reduce potential disagreements over election 
results.  The training is to include workshops for judges in 
the municipal election boards, on dispute resolution and 
administration of resources, and courses provided by 
universities and a USAID-supported NGO for poll workers. 
Also to reduce problems with the returns, universities are 
collaborating with the JCE to recruit 75,000 poll workers 
with better educational qualifications than in the past. 
Arias and Ramos told us the JCE has been fulfilling its 
duties in resolving disputes in the political parties\' 
nomination process.  Since last March, Ramos and his 
colleagues have issued more than a dozen decisions on 
intra-party conflicts, based on each party\'s statutes and 
regulations.  The JCE expects to rule soon on the widening 
split among competing candidates in the ruling Dominican 
Revolutionary Party - PRD (Ref A).  (Note: The JCE has not 
yet announced a decision.  End note.)  Ramos said the JCE 
publishes the text of all its rulings, including the legal 
basis for each decision. 
 
Voting of Dominicans Abroad 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
10. (SBU) Judge Gomez explained that, for the first time, 
Dominicans living abroad would be entitled to vote.  Voting 
centers were being set up in Puerto Rico, New York City, New 
Jersey, the Boston area, Miami, and Tampa, as well as in 
Canada, Venezuela, and Spain.  Some 26,000 expatriate 
Dominicans were already registered.  The JCE was set to begin 
an advertising campaign to increase that number and had 
extended the registration deadline at those locations until 
January 16.  Gomez expressed confidence that the newly 
established voting arrangements abroad would work smoothly. 
 
International Observers 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
11. (SBU) Judge Arias said international observers would be 
invited soon, and he welcomed public support and comment on 
the electoral process by diplomats posted in the Dominican 
Republic.  Gomez said the JCE had approached \"several 
countries\" and the OAS and UN about sending observers or 
technical assistance.  (Comment:  Per Ref B, Embassy has 
requested funding from the Department to support proposed 
observer missions from NDI, IFES, and possibly the Carter 
Center and the OAS.  Some of these entities have proposed an 
observer presence beginning in January or February to cover 
the entire electoral process, a point that our Dominican 
political and non-government contacts have strongly 
recommended.  Embassy will take full and appropriate 
advantage of Arias\'s invitation to local diplomats.  End 
comment.) 
12. (U) This message was not reviewed by Assistant Secretary 
Noriega. 
HERTELL 
"
"12852","12/19/2003 23:33","03SANTODOMINGO7490","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SANTODOMINGO7395","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 007490 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, PGOV 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTIONS #11: PRD PRIMARY SLIPS TO 2004 
 
REF: A. (A) SANTO DOMINGO 7395 (NOTAL) 
 
     B. (B) SANTO DOMINGO 7132 
 
1. (SBU) Following is number 11 in our Dominican presidential 
election series: 
 
PRD PRESIDENTIAL PRIMARY: SHOW POSTPONED AGAIN, CAST UNCERTAIN 
 
As foreseen in Ref A, President Mejia\'s three challengers in 
the PRD presidential primary that had been rescheduled for 
December 21 pulled out, amid charges that the President had 
tampered with the party\'s membership roster and was using 
public resources to campaign and buy votes.  Mejia published 
a letter December 17 firmly dismissing his three challengers\' 
demand that he quit the race for the PRD nomination (see text 
below).  On December 18, the organizing committee for the 
primary announced it would be postponed until January 18, and 
Mejia quickly agreed to the new date.  But one of our 
contacts has confirmed that Mejia\'s PPH faction decided not 
to allow the challengers to pool their primary votes against 
his and or accept a 50-percent-plus-1 majority requirement 
for the winner, as previously agreed. 
 
These moves sent the challengers -- Vice President Milagros 
Ortiz-Bosch, Tourism Secretary Rafael \"Fello\" Subervi, and 
Enmanuel Esquea -- scrambling for an alternative game plan. 
Late on November 18 they announced formation of a committee 
of nine advisers -- three for each pre-candidate -- to devise 
a method for choosing a single condidate among them.  They 
deferred any reconsideration of their decision not to run in 
the primary with Mejia.  Government-owned daily \"Listin 
Diario\" suggested the three might hold their own separate 
primary.  A Subervi adviser told us the three would remain 
aloof from the Mejia primary and select their own candidate 
among themselves, based on a polling sample of PRD members. 
Our contact also suggested Congress might change the 
electoral law to permit a political party to field more than 
one presidential candidate. 
 
Subervi met this week with PRD party president Hatuey De 
Camps, who was nominated by a rump PRD primary December 7 
(Ref B).  An adviser to Subervi told us an effort was 
underway to convince De Camps to renounce his own anti-Mejia 
candidacy and join forces with the three. 
 
Meanwhile, the Central Election Board (JCE) continued meeting 
daily to decide which of the two primary elections -- De 
Camps\' on December 7 or Mejia\'s now postponed until January 
-- was legitimately convened according to the PRD\'s statutes. 
 The JCE is examining documentation submitted in support of 
both sides and his publicly promised a decision before 
Christmas.  A rumored possible way out of this politically 
thorny issue for the JCE judges:  Declare both primaries null 
and void, and force the PRD\'s scrapping presidential 
contenders to reconsider their behavior. 
 
The PRD\'s main foe in the May 16 election, former President 
Leonel Fernandez (PLD), appeared stronger than ever against 
the fragmented PRD.  A preference poll of the general 
electorate released December 19 gave him 63 percent versus 15 
percent for any PRD candidate including Mejia. 
 
2. (U) Following is our informal translation of President 
Mejia\'s reply to the three challengers: 
 
(Begin text) 
 
Santo Domingo de Guzman 
December 16, 2003 
 
Comrades 
Milagros Ortiz Bosch, 
Rafael Subervi Bonilla, 
Emmanuel Esquea Guerrero, 
 
Distinguished Comrades: 
 
I received and read attentively your communication of 
yesterday.  My decision to opt for the Dominican 
Revolutionary Party\'s grass roots and seek the presidential 
candidacy for the 2004 elections has been the result of my 
sincere conviction that I have the determination, the popular 
support and the commitment to govern on behalf of the needy 
majority of this country, and not exclusively for the 
minority that has everything. 
 
My aspiration has a legal basis in the General Statutes of 
the Party, which do not prohibit presidential re-election, 
and in our Constitution\'s article 49, which expressly permits 
it. 
 
Convinced of the democratic practices that our unforgettable 
leader Dr. Jose Francisco Pena Gomez taught us, I have 
insisted that the Party\'s supporters among the people should 
decide freely, without back-room deals. 
 
Despite the many intemperate attacks against me, in order to 
show tolerance, democratic spirit and party unity, I reached 
an agreement with you November 12 to hold a Convention in 
which you could pool your votes against me -- all against one. 
 
In addition, the agreement requires me to obtain more than 50 
percent of the votes, knowing that the General Statutes of 
the PRD stipulate a simple majority for internal elections. 
 
I also agreed to allow your delegates to the Primary 
Organizing Committees and the polling sites to be selected 
individually, even through I knew that they would act in a 
bloc against my candidacy. 
 
Then I unhesitatingly agreed to your request to postpone the 
Primary which had originally been scheduled for last Sunday, 
December 14. 
 
The arguments in your letter focuse on the printed membership 
list for the Primary. 
 
As you will recall, niether I nor my supporters wanted to add 
new voters to the membership list, but I went along with that 
to please you. 
 
The checking of the list is an essentially technical task, 
which should be managed by the responsible and prestigious 
Primary Organizing Committee.  From the beginning I 
instructed our technicians to cooperate with you on this, 
with the understanding that the audit of the list was 
approved by the technical representatives of the 
pre-candidates and accepted as correct and valid for the 
primary process.  The printing of the membership list in the 
next few hours will be essential for the primary to be held 
on Sunday, December 21. 
 
I don\'t know whether you fully understand the situation of 
the country:  we are faced with a conspiracy of special 
interest groups that want to block the modernization of our 
economy, the financial system, the establishment of a social 
security system, democratization of housing, and equitable 
distribution of public expenditures: measures that benefit 
the poor, small account holders, the entire Nation.  For this 
reason they want to oust the PRD, which is the only party 
that can ensure governability. 
 
It was this entire challenge that led me to run for 
re-election: If I don\'t defend the performance of my 
administration, which is confronting those special interests, 
no one will defend it. 
 
I\'m telling you this because you don\'t seem to be aware of it. 
 
You\'ve cast the debate in the party in terms of re-election 
or no re-election, and not in terms of people\'s real 
interest: to be able to work, advance, free themselves from 
the dictates of a powerful minority that wants to enslave 
them. 
 
You don\'t appear to understand. 
 
You ask me to renounce my aspirations; but you say not one 
word about what the country can expect from you to deal with 
the situation that we face: the continuation of a profoundly 
unjust society, in which poverty and misery have reached 
levels incompatible with justice and human dignity. 
 
But you are asking even more of me: that because I\'m going to 
win, I should quit. 
 
This is the strangest request I\'ve ever known. 
 
I will not renounce my legitimate rights as a party member 
and under the Constitution. 
 
I will not abdicate the responsibility that I have assumed to 
my followers in the Party. 
 
I intend to continue fulfilling that responsibility. 
 
You may use whichever PRD membership list you find 
appropriate. 
 
The most draconian conditions. 
 
The most inequitable rules. 
 
I\'ll win because the Party and the Dominican people want 
justice.  Against the power elite, they want justice. 
 
My fraternal greetings. 
 
(Signed) 
Hipolito Mejia 
 
(End text) 
 
 
3. (U) Drafted: Bainbridge Cowell. 
 
 
HERTELL 
"
"12923","12/23/2003 20:05","03SANTODOMINGO7535","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","03SANTODOMINGO6907","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 007535 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/CAR-MCISAAC AND T-MCNERNEY 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/23/2013 
TAGS: DR, MARR, PREL 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: ARTICLE 98 AGREEMENT 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 6907 
 
Classified By: A/DCM MARY B. MARSHALL FOR REASON 1.4 (B/D). 
 
1. (C) As reported reftel, the Deputy Secretary of State for 
Foreign Relations on November 28 undertook to have the MFA 
legal office provide appropriate points of contact for us to 
engage directly with government and non-government entities 
that have not yet provided comments on the signed Article 98 
agreement.  The MFA had requested the comments prior to 
recommending legislative ratification of the agreement. 
 
2. (C) After repeated calls to the Deputy Secretary\'s office, 
on December 23 we spoke with MFA Legal Adviser Jorge 
Santiago, who promised to provide us the list of contacts 
\"early in January.\"  Embassy will then engage with them and 
urge prompt delivery of comments, so the MFA recommendation 
can move forward. 
HERTELL 
"
"12924","12/23/2003 20:51","03SANTODOMINGO7536","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","03PORTAUPRINCE2540|03SANTODOMINGO4930","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 007536 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, DEPT PLEASE PASS TO USOAS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/22/2013 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PHUM, PINR, DR, HA 
SUBJECT: HAITIAN AMBASSADOR TO DOMINICAN REPUBLIC RESIGNS: 
ANOTHER BLOW TO ARISTIDE 
 
REF: A. PORT AU PRINCE 2540 
     B. SANTO DOMINGO 4930 
 
Classified By: ACTING DCM MARY B. MARSHALL FOR REASONS 1.5 B/D 
 
SUMMARY 
 
1. (C) On December 18 the Haitian Ambassador to the Dominican 
Republic Guy Alexandre called on the Ambassador and Acting 
DCM to confirm his resignation.  The sudden news (prompted by 
the violent December 5 crackdown on student demonstrators in 
Haiti) was widely covered December 16 while Ambassador 
Alexandre was out of the country visiting his wife in Puerto 
Rico.  Ambassdor Alexandre\'s resignation is due to what he 
described as \"incompatible principles\" with Arisitide\'s 
government.  Composed but staunch in his resolve, Alexandre 
assured the Ambassador that he has no plans to seek asylum in 
the United States for now.  Requesting asylum, he explained, 
would \"further complicate Dominican-Haitian bilateral 
relations\" and would not be in his nor Haiti\'s best 
interests.  Instead, Alexandre said he would seek residency 
in the Dominican Republic and teach at a university.  End 
Summary. 
 
ALEXANDRE RESIGNS AS AMBASSADOR TO THE DR 
 
2. (C) Ambassador Guy Alexandre met with the Ambassador and 
Acting DCM on December 18 to discuss his recent resignation. 
He said that he had planned to leave his post in January 2004 
after Haiti\'s independence bicentennial celebrations, which 
would have also marked two years in his assignment.  However, 
he could not ignore the recent violence against students in 
Haiti because of his strong links to the academic community 
there.  According to Alexandre, police officers broke both 
knees of one of his friends, a vice-rector at a university 
(Ref A).  The December 5 violence, he lamented, \"produced an 
irrevocable situation that cannot be easily fixed,\" 
following months of extreme polarization and resulting chaos. 
 
3. (C) According to Ambassador Alexandre\'s contacts in Haiti, 
there are daily protests or preemptive crackdowns by police 
on potential protests.  He warned of an upsurge in armed 
civilians looking for trouble.  Alexandre expressed his 
concern that the environment in Haiti is ripe for 
confrontation, which might subside briefly during Christmas 
but is sure to resume in January.  He commented that Haiti 
has minimal capacity to maintain order and that \"none of the 
Haitian politicians realize that the country is a ticking 
time bomb.\" 
 
REMOVE ARISTIDE...THEN WHAT? 
 
4. (C) Ambassador Alexandre criticized opposition groups\' 
preoccupation with forcing Aristide\'s departure without 
considering the consequences.  He emphasized that Aristide\'s 
exit will not solve Haiti\'s socio-economic problems. 
Alexandre also criticized his countrymen for their focus on 
grabbing power rather than tackling the difficult problems of 
health, education and infrastructure.  The Ambassador asked 
Alexandre whether there are clandestine movements in the 
Dominican Republic working to overthrow Aristide, to which 
Alexandre responded that he does not know of any such 
activity.  He acknowledged that some disgruntled former 
Haitian military officers reside in the Dominican Republic, 
but said most of the pressure on Aristide originates in 
Haiti.  He recalled the 1991-94 period when many Haitians 
fled the country, but claimed there was no no mass migration. 
 During that time Alexandre personally assisted 30 Haitians, 
including a former Army chief. 
 
DOMINICAN-HAITIAN BILATERAL RELATIONS 
 
5. (C) Less than three weeks before his resignation, 
Ambassador Alexandre met with the Ambassador on December 1 to 
discuss concerns about Dominican-Haitian bilateral relations. 
 He was disturbed about the GODR\'s apparent nonchalant 
investigations regarding the Haitian bodies discovered along 
the border in September (Ref B).  Alexandre also said the 
GODR is not doing enough to document Haitians.  He complained 
that the GODR often uses Article 11 of the Dominican 
Constitution (providing that anyone born on Dominican soil is 
Dominican except offspring of diplomats or foreigners in 
transit) to deny citizenship to Haitians for being 
\"foreigners in transit.\"  Ambassador Alexandre also blamed 
the failure of the 2001 OAS initiative on a lack of OAS 
impartiality (Note: This argument was reiterated at the 
follow-up meeting on December 18.  End note). 
ALEXANDRE\'S ONWARD PLANS 
6. (C) Alexandre said he currently plans to reside in the 
Dominican Republic, not flee to the United States.  He was 
traveling to Puerto Rico when his resignation hit the press 
and returned quickly thereafter.  He emphasized his desire to 
get involved in academia and denied having strong ties to 
successful Haitian expats in the United States.  Alexandre 
did ask the Acting DCM (Consul General) that his B1/B2 
nonimmigrant visa be transferred to his tourist passport. 
Alexandre said the GOH had not yet accepted his resignation. 
He claimed to have no interest in politics because he \"knows 
too well what Haiti needs.\" 
HERTELL 
"
"12944","12/24/2003 17:52","03SANTODOMINGO7566","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 007566 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, KCRM, KJUS, PGOV, PINR 
SUBJECT: BANKING SERIES #3: FORMER BANINTER EXECUTIVES 
RELEASED ON BAIL 
 
 
1.  The following is the third in a series of reports on the 
Dominican Banking sector. 
 
2.  On December 20, an Appeals Court panel of three judges 
ruled to allow the release of former Baninter President Ramon 
Baez Figueroa and Vice-President Marcos Baez Cocco on RD $100 
million bail each.  After some delay because of coordination 
issues between the defendant\'s lawyers and the Attorney 
General\'s Office the two were finally released on Tuesday, 
December 23.  The ruling has had widespread coverage in all 
local daily newspapers and has sparked debate among Dominican 
authorities on the legitimacy of the decision. 
 
3.  The panel, headed by Judge Miriam German Brito, ruled 
that the incarceration of the two men since their arrest last 
May was unconstitutional.  Baez Figueroa and Baez Cocco had 
been detained for their suspected involvement in the massive 
USD $2.2 billion Baninter  banking fraud.  Some Dominicans 
have spoken out in favor of the decision, saying it was the 
right thing to do even if it seems wrong to the public. 
Among those has been Jose Alfredo Rizek, Executive Director 
of the Fundacion Institucionalidad y Justicia (FINJUS) -- a 
prominent USAID-supported NGO that promotes judicial reform 
-- and Jorge Subero Isa, President of the Dominican Supreme 
Court.  Rizek commented that Dominican authorities have 
traditionally abused constitutional rights of detainees, 
imprisoning them for long periods before filing formal 
charges.  Several commentators including him believe the 
ruling advances reform of the Dominican judicial system. 
Others, like Maximo Aristy Caraballo, Attorney General for 
the National District, voiced concern that the decision could 
open the door to release of other accused defrauders and 
money launderers. 
 
4. It is expected that the two men will be celebrating 
Christmas at home with their families, but how long they will 
stay in the country is on the mind of many Dominicans.  If 
the men do decide to flee, it will not be to the United 
States since neither is a US citizen or permanent resident 
and Embassy\'s NIV section revoked both men\'s visas in May, 
2003. 
 
5. Embassy will continue to report further developments in 
the investigation and prosecution of this case. 
HERTELL 
"
"12945","12/24/2003 18:05","03SANTODOMINGO7567","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SANTODOMINGO7132|03SANTODOMINGO7490","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 007567 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, PGOV 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTIONS #12: HATUEY IN CHECK, NO END 
GAME FOR PRD NOMINATION 
 
REF: A. (A) SANTO DOMINGO 7132 
     B. (B) SANTO DOMINGO 7490 
 
1. (SBU) Following is number 12 in our Dominican presidential 
election series: 
 
PRD PRIMARIES: HATUEY IN CHECK, BUT NO END GAME YET FOR THE 
NOMINATION 
 
The Central Electoral Board (JCE) on December 22 issued a 
ruling that many observers here believe will advance 
President Mejia\'s controversial bid for re-election.  The 
ruling sidelined one of President Mejia\'s four remaining 
challengers for the ruling PRD\'s presidential nomination, 
confirmed the validity of a primary election in which Mejia 
plans to compete with or without opponents, contributed 
nothing to repairing the deep divisions in the country\'s 
largest political party, and weakened the JCE\'s tenuous 
credibility as a nonpartisan referee of the presidential 
election process between now and May 16. 
 
The first and so far only official PRD candidate, elected in 
a primary December 7 (Ref A), PRD president Hatuey De Camps 
lost his advantage when the JCE ruled invalid the November 15 
rump meeting of the PRD National Executive Committee (CEN) 
that had authorized the primary election that nominated him. 
Hatuey bitterly criticized the JCE -- and specifically its 
plenary president Luis Arias -- for acting not as independent 
judges, but as partisans of Mejia\'s PRD/PPH faction.  Hatuey 
said his legal team would consider a possible appeal to the 
Supreme Court.  (Note: JCE decisions normally cannot be 
appealed, but may be if constitutional issues are involved. 
End note.) 
 
A different CEN meeting on November 15, which had convoked a 
PRD primary to include President Mejia and three other 
candidates, received the JCE seal of approval.  The 
organizers of this CEN had asked the JCE to rule on which CEN 
legally represented the PRD.  The JCE found that the second 
CEN -- attended by more than 500 members -- had gathered a 
quorum according to PRD rules, but the Hatuey De Camps CEN 
had fallen far short.  The JCE also ordered the PRD to reopen 
the nominating process to anyone not yet in the game. 
 
The three other challengers to Mejia -- Vice President 
Milagros Ortiz-Bosch, Tourism Secretary Rafael \"Fello\" 
Subervi, and Enmanuel Esquea -- held firm on their recent 
withdrawal from the authorized PRD primary with President 
Mejia, now rescheduled for January 18 (Ref B).  The three are 
considering a plan to commission two preference polls among 
PRD members and to unite behind whichever of the three scores 
the highest. 
 
The situation could unfold in several ways:  (1) Former 
nominee Hatuey De Camps may join with the three now that they 
have dissocated themselves from Mejia\'s primary; (2) The 
three -- or four -- may pool their supporters behind a single 
candidate to try to convince Mejia to drop out; or (3) The 
three may back a unity candidate who would then reverse 
position and re-enter the January 18 primary against Mejia. 
In its ruling, the JCE stipulated that it would monitor the 
primary election to ensure compliance with party rules and 
the law. 
 
JCE Dispute Resolution Chamber presiding judge Salvador Ramos 
promised to publish a full text of the decision with 
supporting arguments, but the release has been delayed. 
Plenary presiding judge -- and JCE head -- Arias publicly 
disclaimed any responsibility and said the JCE\'s Dispute 
Resolution Chamber had exclusive power to decide the case. 
Press reports indicated that the chamber\'s five judges had 
reached a 3-2 decision, with presiding judge Ramos reversing 
his position at the last minute.  According to the reports, 
the minority judges had proposed invalidating both CEN 
meetings, thus requiring the conflicting factions to 
compromise on a revised presidential nomination procedure. 
 
 
As of Christmas Eve, a traditional family holiday here, 
Archbishop Nicolas de Jesus Cardinal Lopez Rodriguez\'s recent 
call for a political truce is expected to postpone further 
significant moves until early January.  But for the PRD, 
already behind in nominating its presidential candidate, each 
delay dims the divided party\'s election prospects. 
 
2. (U) Drafted: Bainbridge Cowell. 
 
 
 
HERTELL 
"
"12946","12/24/2003 20:25","03SANTODOMINGO7568","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","03STATE345870","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 007568 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/24/2013 
TAGS: DR, KNNP, LY, MNUC, PARM, PREL 
SUBJECT: LIBYA ADMITS WMD PROGRAMS; U.S. REACTION 
 
REF: STATE 345870 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Bainbridge Cowell for reasons 1.4 (b), 
 (d), (h). 
 
(C) Per action request para 3 reftel, Embassy on December 23 
delivered briefing material in paras 6-10 reftel to MFA 
international organizations division chief Jesus Maria 
Hernandez.  He thanked us for the information and said he 
would share it with appropriate MFA officials, including at 
the Dominican Republic\'s Mission to the UN. 
HERTELL 
"
"12958","12/29/2003 11:03","03SANTODOMINGO7570","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","03SANTODOMINGO7134","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 007570 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR AND EB/IFD; PLEASE PASS TO 
USTR/RVARGO; TREASURY FOR OASIA/NLEE; NSC FOR HCRUZ 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/23/2013 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, ECIN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOLLARS SCARCE AT OFFICIAL RATE -- BLACK MARKET 
GROWING 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 7134 
 
Classified By: Acting EcoPolCouns Thomas C. Pierce; reason: 1.5(b & d) 
 
 1.  (C) Summary: Technical Secretary Carlos Despradel said 
he had \"no response, but would inform the President\" when 
emboff conveyed Ambassador\'s concerns about an emerging 
currency black market.  In a recent meeting, the GODR 
reportedly appealed to traders\' sense of patriotism and the 
urgent need for an IMF program to elicit agreement from 
currency traders to sell dollars at a lower price.  Embassy 
contacts confirm local press reports that dollars are scarce 
at the \"official\" exchange rate, and at least one paper has 
begun to quote the \"mercado negro\" rate alongside the 
official rate.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) Since Mejia\'s December 2 appointment of a 
commission headed by police and military officers to enforce 
exchange trading regulations and close down illegal 
operators, the \"official\" exchange rate has stabilized at 
around RD$35 per USD.  Prior to the appointment of the 
commission, the peso had been trading above RD$43 (reftel). 
However, there are now widespread reports of a shortage of 
dollars at the official rate.  Exchange houses frequently 
remain closed, and banks are limiting the sale of dollars.  A 
vice president of the country\'s largest private commercial 
bank, Banco Popular, told emboff December 23 that his bank is 
even limiting its sale of dollars for payment on 
dollar-denominated credit cards (issued by Popular) to the 
minimum payment amount.  Other contacts, as well as the 
press, have confirmed that few if any dollars are available 
at the official rate.  However, they note that dollars are 
readily available \"on the street\" for about RD$40/1.  They 
also report incidences of (presumably preferred) customers 
purchasing dollars from exchange houses at the official rate, 
and then selling them outside at a premium. 
 
3.  (C) The owner of a medium-size chain of exchange houses 
told emboffs December 19 that Central Bank officials had met 
with bankers and foreign exchange traders earlier that week 
and told them that an IMF agreement hinged upon maintaining 
the currency below RD$40 per dollar.  He said that the group 
informally agreed to keep the rate below 40, and that the 
Association of Foreign Exchange Traders now recommends to its 
members the price for dollars.  The contact said that the 
GODR threatened further audits if the rate slipped and that 
the Superintendent of Banks has stationed people inside some 
of the exchange houses. 
 
4.  (C) Emboff called Technical Secretary Despradel December 
22 to inquire about developments in the currency market and 
to convey concerns about apparent GODR interference. 
Despradel said that he had \"no response.\"  He said that as an 
economist he agreed that exchange controls would not work, 
but added that \"no one could govern the country if the rate 
went to RD$70 to one.\"  He said that he would raise Embassy\'s 
concerns with the President. 
 
5.  (C) In a separate meeting, officials from the Secretariat 
of Industry and Commerce reiterated the GODR position that 
the government is only trying to prevent illegal speculation 
against the peso.  They said they would ask the Secretary of 
Commerce, who is a member of the Monetary Board, also to 
raise concerns about interference in he exchange rate with 
the President. 
 
6.  (C) Comment: The GODR finds itself in a difficult 
position and appears to be trying to \"thread the needle.\"  It 
wants to maintain fuel import prices and avoid social unrest 
that could result from rising costs of basic goods.  At the 
same time, there probably are people speculating against the 
peso, and they likely have more resources to intervene in the 
foreign exchange market than the Central Bank does.  However, 
most observers believe that the weakness of the peso is due 
primarily to lack of confidence.  End comment. 
HERTELL 
"
"12983","12/30/2003 18:32","03SANTODOMINGO7604","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","03SECSTATE318223|03SECSTATE348650","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 007604 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/30/2013 
TAGS: KSUM, PREL, ECON 
SUBJECT: SPECIAL SUMMIT OF THE AMERICAS: DOMINICAN RESPONSE 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 348650 
     B. SECSTATE 318223 
 
Classified By: ACTING DCM MARY B. MARSHALL FOR REASONS 1.5 B/D 
 
1. (SBU) On December 30 Acting DCM delivered demarche (ref A) 
to Secretary of Foreign Relations Frank Guerrero Prats. 
Prats reiterated that the Government of the Dominican 
Republic (GODR) stands ready to support U.S. sponsored 
initiatives.  He asked that emboffs contact the Foreign 
Relations Secretariat Office Director of International 
Organizations, Ambassador Jesus Maria Hernandez to discuss 
demarche details. 
 
2. (C) Ambassdor Hernandez confirmed that he would accompany 
Foreign Minister Prats to the summit in Mexico.  He told 
poloff that the Dominican Republic agrees with the U.S. 
proposed texts on transparency, anti-corruption and 
terrorism.  However, he was hesitant to offer support for 
setting specific dates for completion of actions to implement 
the Quebec mandates (ref A), due to what he termed as 
\"internal bureaucratic difficulties.\"  Ambassador Hernandez 
asked whether the Venezuelan proposal to change language in 
the Declaration of Margarita Island would be revisited (ref 
B) and also expressed interest in proposed language about 
poverty reduction.  He also questioned why there is no 
proposed declaration regarding the Free Trade Agreement of 
the Americas.  Ambassador Hernandez did not elaborate futher 
on these topics. 
 
HERTELL 
"
"13128","1/8/2004 21:45","04SANTODOMINGO147","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 000147 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, WHA/CAR (SMITH, MCISAAC), WHA/PPSC, WHA/OAS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION SERIES #13: NEW FEINT: THE LAW 
OF \"SLOGANS\" 
 
 
1.  Following is no. 13 in our series on the Dominican 
presidential elections. 
 
 
NEW FEINT: PROPOSAL FOR AMENDMENTS WITH THE LAW OF \"SLOGANS\" 
 
                     \"We are steeped to the marrow in 
                      impulsiveness, always reacting to 
                      immediate circumstances, the reason 
                      that we are dogged by terrible evil 
                      of superficiality -- the perpetual 
                      source of preventable mistakes.\" 
 
                            -- Listin Diario editorial, 
                               January 8: \"ASI SOMOS\" 
 
PRD Henry Sarraff may or may not have been well-intentioned 
when he put his \"Law of Slogans\" (Ley de Lemas) into the 
legislative hopper on January 2, but he certainly gave a new 
energy to discussion of the blockages in the major parties. 
In brief, his solution to the leadership crises in the ruling 
Revolutionary Democratic Party (PRD) and in the Revolutionary 
Social Christian Party (PRSC) is to move the party primary 
process to election day.  Sarraff would allow each recognized 
party to field up to five tickets -- president plus vice 
president -- and would declare victory for the leading ticket 
of the leading party.  The \"slogans\" tag is shorthand for the 
two-step choice of the voter: first, for a party (with its 
\"slogan\") and then for a faction of that party (with its own, 
subordinated \"slogan\"). 
 
Saraff argues in a letter to the Ambassador that the process 
is similar to that used for the election of the Dominican 
Congress in 2002, in which representives of the provinces 
were chosen from prioritized political party lists in 
proportion to the percentages of the total vote.  Saraff 
calls this the \"Uruguay model,\" without noting it was used 
there in 1939 (and has since been abandoned). 
 
Sarraff\'s suggestion for dealing with the breakdown of the 
party primary process appeals greatly to the three PRD 
pre-candidates (VP Ortiz-Bosch, Rafael Subervi and Emmanuel 
Esquea) who decided, finally, not to run against incumbent 
President Hipolito Mejia in the PRD national party vote now 
set for January 18.  They had previously sought an 
arrangement whereby they could mutually pledge votes to the 
leader amongst the three, in hopes of overcoming Mejia on his 
own ground.  Saraff\'s proposed modifications of the electoral 
law would give each of them a (long-shot) opportunity to try 
to outperform Mejia on election day and thereby take both the 
PRD and the presidency away from him.  They would be betting 
that an unsplintered PRD would be likely to outpoll the PLD, 
no matter how attractive the current prospects of PLD 
candidate Leonel Fernandez. 
 
Everyone in town has something to say about this one, which 
suggests to us that many are apprehensive that this very 
late, very ornate, and PRD-slanted initiative might actually 
get voted through by the heavy PRD majority in the Congress. 
Technically, the current extension of the legislative session 
expires on January 12 and is charged only with considering 
legislation relating to the budget and the IMF program. 
House of Representatives President Pacheco commented 
tight-lipped that legislators would \"study\" the proposal.  If 
the Congress doesn\'t act quickly, the only recourse would be 
to get Mejia to call a special session or to wait until the 
February 27 regular session.  Mejia, at first apparently 
interested in the Saraff initiative, subsequently backed away 
from it, telling journalists, \"This is no creature of ours.\" 
 
Leonel Fernandez initially dissmissed the proposal as \"sloppy 
thinking,\" but as clamor increased, on Janauary 7 he sent PLD 
chiefs to ask the coordinator of the civil-society \"Elections 
Monitoring Commission\" Msgr Agripino Nunez to convene a 
public debate on the proposal.  Nunez had just received Peggy 
Cabral, widow of PRD leader Jose Pena Gomez and organizer of 
the \"official\" PRD party vote.  Cabral had earlier received 
the three PRD pre-candidates in her home for a lengthy, 
inconclusive session.  She called on Nunez in her personal 
capacity, not as the PRD organizer.  The monsignor told the 
press he was sorry that Peggy Cabral, \"she, of all persons, 
has to get involved in this difficult business.\" 
 
That evening Mejia received the three PRD pre-candidates for 
a discussion, but no one reported any progress.  As he left, 
Subervi repeated that he and Mejia\'s other rivals would not 
be participating in the January 18 vote. 
Secretary of Culture Tony Rahul, organizer of the postponed 
 
SIPDIS 
December 18 PRD convention, wrote an op-ed piece in Listin 
Diario advocating the \"Ley de Lemas.\" The leading business 
organization CONEP opposes it. Rebel PRD party president 
Hatuey Descamps called the proposal \"a joke, at a well-chosen 
moment.\" 
PRSC presidential candidate Eduardo Estrella is against the 
idea, and his supporters called for action against it. 
Estrella\'s frustrated rival Jacinto Peynado, still in 
hospital in Miami, was cautiously non-committal in response 
to a journalist\'s phone call. 
 
Would it be constitutional?  President of the well respected 
NGO \"Foundation for Institutionalism and Justice\" (FINJUS) 
Jose Rizek maintains that the idea would contravene the 
Constitution\'s specific directive that the president and 
vice-president are elected by a \"direct vote\"; if the law is 
passed, FINJUS will petition the Supreme Court for an 
interpretation. 
 
The \"Ley de Lemas\" may be part of the silly season, but it\'s 
not beyond imagination that politicians feeling themselves 
unbound by traditions or institutions might set off to pursue 
Saraff\'s beguiling slogans. 
 
In the midst of this confusion, one deeply involved 
politician spoke up with decorum and elegance.  On the 
occasion of the ceremonial New Year\'s greetings to the 
administration, January 6, Vice President Milagros 
Ortiz-Bosch responded to a journalist\'s question about these 
PRD tractations by apologizing to all Dominicans \"for all the 
pain and uncertainties that we have caused during this long 
year, a year also of both economic and financial 
difficulties.\" 
 
2.  Drafted by Michael Meigs. 
 
MARSHALL 
"
"13130","1/8/2004 22:15","04SANTODOMINGO148","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE324347","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 SANTO DOMINGO 000148 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INL AND WHA/CAR 
JUSTICE FOR OIA, AFMLS, AND NDDS 
TREASURY FOR FINCEN 
DEA FOR OILS AND OFFICE OF DIVERSION CONTROL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: 2003-2004 INTERNATIONAL 
NARCOTICS CONTROL STRATEGY REPORT (INCSR) 
 
REF: A. STATE 324347 
 
     B. STATE 328024 
 
 1.  Text of Dominican Republic draft 2002-2003 INCSR follows. 
 
Part One:  Drugs and Chemical Control 
 
I. Summary 
 
The Dominican Republic (DR) is a major transit country for 
South American drugs, mostly cocaine and heroin, moving to 
the United States and Europe. The Government of the Dominican 
Republic (GODR) continued to cooperate closely with the U.S. 
in counternarcotics matters. Last year (2003) saw a decrease 
in heroin seizures, an increase in cocaine interceptions, and 
a decrease in seizures of MDMA (ecstasy); negligible 
cooperation between the Government of the Dominican Republic 
(GODR) and the Haitian police; continued good results of the 
extradition process; and attempts to apply a strong 
anti-money laundering law to a notorious bank fraud case. 
(For details on the GODR\'s anti-money laundering initiatives 
in 2003, see the Money Laundering section of this report.) 
Although the GODR continued its efforts to combat corruption 
in 2003, corruption and weak governmental institutions 
remained an impediment to controlling the flow of illegal 
narcotics through the DR.  In 2003, an estimated eight 
percent of the cocaine directed toward the U.S. flowed 
through Hispaniola, and nearly half this amount reached the 
DR\'s shores directly from South American sources.  The DR is 
a party to the 1988 UN Drug Convention. 
 
II. Status of Country 
 
There is no significant cultivation, refining, or 
manufacturing of major illicit drugs in the DR. Dominican 
criminal organizations are increasingly involved in command 
and control of international drug trafficking operations, but 
the country\'s primary role in regional drug trafficking is as 
a transshipment hub. 
 
Seizures in 2003 continued to indicate that cocaine, heroin, 
and marijuana destined for the United States and, to a lesser 
extent, Europe were being transshipped through the DR and its 
territorial waters. Ecstasy seized in the DR was most often 
being transported from Europe to the United States. Puerto 
Rican authorities noted a decrease in drug smuggling via the 
ferries operating between Puerto Rico and the DR, probably 
due to the presence of a newly established counternarcotics 
canine unit at the Santo Domingo ferry terminal. 
 
Dominican nationals play a major role in the actual 
transshipment of drugs. Many \"go-fast\" crews in the Caribbean 
include Dominican nationals, mostly fishermen recruited from 
the local docks. The crews speak Spanish, the language of the 
source country smugglers; move easily throughout the 
Caribbean; and are recruited for very small amounts of money. 
 
The DR is not a producer of precursor chemicals, but there is 
continued concern about their importation. 
 
III. Country Actions Against Drugs in 2002 
 
Policy Initiatives. The DR-initiated bilateral 
intelligence-sharing and interdiction efforts with Haiti, 
begun after Operation Hurricane in 2001, were not continued 
in 2003. The DR has continued to participate in annual 
Caribbean-wide counternarcotics operations. 
 
The National Directorate for Drug Control (DNCD), the law 
enforcement arm responsible for counternarcotics measures, 
and the National Drug Council (CND), the GODR\'s policy and 
planning organ, have adopted a computerized tracking system 
and are able to track seizures of assets in connection with 
drug-related offenses. 
 
Following the collapse of BANINTER, the third-largest 
Dominican bank, the Dominican Government struggled to 
implement anti-money laundering legislation passed in 2002. 
(See the Money Laundering section of this report.) 
 
The GODR instituted training, with U.S. and other 
international support, for implementing the revised criminal 
procedures code in 2004. This code will change the Dominican 
criminal system from a Napoleonic system, with a dossier of 
evidence evaluated by a judge, to an adversarial system of 
verbal process before a judge or a jury. 
 
Law Enforcement Efforts. The DNCD increased its canine 
program to 30 dogs and handlers.  All canine teams were 
recertified, and unit commanders were certified as dog team 
trainers. 
 
No multinational counternarcotics exercises were conducted 
during 2003. 
The DNCD led a multi-year, U.S. Government-supported effort 
to share data among Dominican law enforcement agencies and to 
make information available on demand by field officers. 
 
Cultivation/Production. There is no known cultivation of coca 
or opium poppy in the DR.  Cannabis is grown on a small scale 
for local consumption. The GODR\'s investigations into 
possible in-country manufacture of MDMA (ecstasy) have 
produced no definitive evidence of such activity. 
 
Drug Flow/Transit. The DNCD maintained its seizure rate, 
interdicting body-carried heroin and cocaine in the DR\'s 
international airports and larger quantities from vehicles 
and buildings. Through December 2003, with cooperation and 
assistance of the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), 
the DNCD seized 1,338 kilograms of cocaine, 59 kilograms of 
heroin, 51,965 units of MDMA (Ecstasy), and 1174 pounds of 
marijuana.  Puerto Rican authorities seized 2,039 kilograms 
of cocaine as a direct result of intelligence supplied by the 
DNCD and the Santo Domingo DEA office.  The DNCD continued to 
focus interdiction operations on the drug-transit routes in 
the DR\'s territorial waters along the northern border and on 
its land border crossings with Haiti, while attempting to 
prevent air drops and sea delivery of illicit narcotics to 
remote areas.  The DNCD and their DEA counterparts 
concentrated increasingly on investigations leading to 
takedown of large criminal organizations, and several 
international rings were broken up as a result. 
 
In 2003, drugs were easily accessible for local consumption 
in most metropolitan areas. The DR attracted a growing number 
of tourists from Europe, the United States, and Canada who 
provided a customer base for local drug sales, especially at 
the beachfront vacation resorts. Traffickers often used drugs 
to pay low-level couriers and distributors. 
 
The DNCD made 3929 drug-related arrests in 2003; of these, 
3692 were Dominican nationals and 237 were foreigners. There 
were 227 fewer drug-related arrests in 2003 than in 2002 and 
62 fewer foreigners were among those arrested on drug charges 
than in 2002. 
 
Only 9 percent of the total cocaine and 61 percent of the 
total heroin seized in the Dominican Republic was seized in 
the airports.  Seizures of Ecstasy were more successful in 
airports, resulting in 77 percent of all Ecstasy pills seized 
in the DR. 
 
Most of the significant seizures were made on land, in the 
big cities.  There were some seizures made at the Haitian 
border in 2003, but quantities seized were limited.  While 
the number of seizures made in Dominican airports was high, 
the actual amount of drugs seized was small.  Maritime 
seizures remain a challenge for the DR, especially drugs 
hidden in commercial vessels for shipment to the US and/or 
Europe.  In one December case, DNCD canine teams were 
dispatched at a moment\'s notice to search a suspect freighter 
in a small port near the Haitian border; that investigation 
continues. 
 
Extradition. The U.S.-Dominican Extradition Treaty dates from 
1909. Extradition of nationals is not mandated under the 
treaty, and for many years Dominican legislation barred the 
extradition of Dominican nationals. Former President 
Fernandez signed legislation in 1998 allowing the extradition 
of Dominican nationals. In March 2000, the U.S. Marshals 
Service assigned two marshals temporarily to the DR. They 
received excellent cooperation from the DNCD\'s special 
Section for Fugitive Surveillance and other relevant 
Dominican authorities in locating fugitives and returning 
them to the U.S. to face justice. The marshals were withdrawn 
in 2002, then returned permanently during 2003. 
 
President Mejia\'s administration generally maintained its 
record of cooperation in 2003, and the GODR extradited 17 
Dominicans to the United States during the year. The DNCD 
arrested 20 fugitives in 2003 in response to U.S. extradition 
requests. The National Police, working with the FBI, arrested 
and extradited two drug-related subjects. Eight individuals 
are now in custody pending extradition to the United States. 
 
In December 2003, with no fanfare, one of six persons 
arrested in the \"Joselito.com\" case and awaiting deportation 
to the United States was released on orders of the Attorney 
General.  In response to Embassy protests, the Attorney 
General cited supposed inadequacies in the extradition 
request package.  At year\'s end, President Mejia was aware of 
USG concerns, but no further action had been taken. 
 
Mutual Legal Assistance. The GODR cooperates with USG 
agencies, including the DEA, FBI, U.S. Customs Service, and 
U.S. Marshals Service on counternarcotics and fugitive 
matters. 
 
The DNCD housed and manned the DEA-sponsored Caribbean Center 
for Drug Information (CDI) at its facilities in Santo 
Domingo.  An increasing number of Caribbean countries have 
found the CDI\'s intelligence analysis services useful and are 
now frequent contributors of new information. 
 
The Dominican Navy received six renovated patrol craft and 
two newly constructed 100 foot patrol ships, supplied under a 
U.S. $22 million commercial contract with a U.S. company, and 
plans were made to incorporate these vessels into 
multilateral counternarcotics and anti-migration patrol 
activities. 
 
Corruption.  The GODR does not, as a matter of government 
policy, encourage or facilitate illicit production or 
distribution of narcotics, psychotropic drugs, and other 
controlled substances, nor does it contribute to drug-related 
money laundering. 
 
Dominican institutions remain vulnerable to influence by 
interest groups or individuals with money to spend, including 
narcotics traffickers. The GODR has not convicted any senior 
government official for engaging in, encouraging, or in any 
way facilitating the illicit production or distribution of 
illicit drugs or controlled substances, or the laundering of 
proceeds from illegal drug transactions. 
 
Legislation remains pending that would strengthen enforcement 
of a 1979 law that requires senior appointed, civil service, 
and elected officials to file financial disclosure 
statements. In what may be a regional model for transparency 
and an indication of the seriousness of the Dominican 
judiciary to uphold the ethical quality of employees, the 
sworn financial disclosure statements for all Dominican 
judges can be found on the Internet at 
http//www.suprema.gov.do/jueces/dj.htm. Nonetheless, an 
effective system to verify these statements has not yet been 
implemented and there are no sanctions for false statements. 
 
The GODR is a party to the Inter-American Convention Against 
Corruption and in 2001 signed the consensus agreement on 
establishing a mechanism to evaluate compliance with the 
Convention. 
 
Precursor Chemical Control. The Secretariat of Health is 
responsible for the control of chemicals entering and 
departing the DR. The CND has prohibited the re-exportation 
of certain chemicals. 
 
Domestic Programs (Demand Reduction). The DNCD conducted 79 
youth events in various cities and neighborhoods, from 
basketball tournaments to chess matches, reaching over 
200,000 young people to encourage competitive and 
recreational activities as better choices than drug abuse.  A 
non-governmental organization, Foundation for Life (FUNVIDA), 
published with U.S. Government assistance a book entitled 
\"Schools Without Drugs\" and distributed it gratis at several 
neighborhood meetings in the capital area. 
 
Agreements and Treaties. In 1984, the United States and the 
DR entered into an agreement on international narcotics 
control cooperation. In May 2003 the Dominican Republic 
entered into three comprehensive bilateral agreements, on 
Cooperation in Maritime Migration Law Enforcement, Maritime 
Counter-Drug Operations, and Search and Rescue, granting 
permanent overflight provisions in all three agreements for 
the respective operations.  The three agreements conclude a 
long bilateral effort to secure permanent overflight 
provisions; previous agreements provided only annual 
provisions.  In addition, the Maritime Counter-Drug Agreement 
broadened the scope of operations agreed to by the parties. 
The DR remains an active participant in ongoing negotiations 
to reach a Caribbean regional maritime counternarcotics 
agreement. 
 
In 2002 the DR became the first country in the Western 
Hemisphere to sign an Article 98 agreement exempting U.S. 
military personnel in the DR from the jurisdiction of the 
International Criminal Court (ICC). In 2001, the United 
States and the DR exchanged instruments of ratification of 
the Treaty for the Return of Stolen or Embezzled Vehicles. 
Attempts to implement the treaty have been hampered by 
organizational weaknesses within the Dominican bureaucracy, 
and in 2003 no vehicles were repatriated under this treaty. 
 
The DR has signed but not ratified the UN Convention against 
Transnational Organized Crime, the Protocol to Prevent, 
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, the Protocol 
against the Smuggling of Migrants, and the Protocol against 
the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms. 
 
IV. U.S. Policy Initiatives and Programs 
 
Cocaine and heroin trafficking, money laundering, 
institutional corruption, and reform of the judicial system 
remain the United States\' primary counternarcotics concerns 
in the DR. The USG and the GODR cooperate to develop 
Dominican institutions that can interdict and seize narcotics 
shipments and conduct effective investigations leading to 
arrests, prosecutions, and convictions. The USG will continue 
to urge the GODR to improve its asset forfeiture procedures 
and its capacity to regulate financial institutions, develop 
and maintain strict controls on precursor chemicals, and 
improve its demand reduction programs. 
 
During 2003, the United States provided essential equipment 
and training to expand the counternarcotics canine units, 
supported the DNCD\'s vetted special investigation unit and 
border intelligence units, provided radio equipment to 
facilitate communications along the DR\'s border with Haiti, 
and funded assessments of airport and port security against 
narcotics trafficking and terrorism. The United States 
delivered three harbor patrol craft and a fully refurbished 
go-fast boat, previously captured from drug smugglers, to the 
Dominican Navy. The United States also assisted the Dominican 
Navy in planning for a complete maintenance and training 
program for its maritime assets. The cornerstone of this 
effort is the reopening of the Navy\'s training and 
maintenance school, closed in 1997.  The first step, 
establishment of a Navy maintenance command, was completed in 
2003. 
 
The United States has funded training to the DNCD Fugitive 
Surveillance Unit, helping it locate, apprehend, and 
extradite individuals wanted on criminal charges in the 
United States. Enhanced computer training, database 
expansion, and systems maintenance support were provided to 
the DNCD. 
 
The Dominican Navy and Air Force have a direct communications 
agreement with the U.S. Coast Guard\'s regional operations 
center (GANTSEC) in San Juan, Puerto Rico. Dominican Navy 
vessels have participated in numerous maritime drug seizures. 
 
USAID\'s \"Strengthened Rule of Law and Respect for Human 
Rights\" program continues to work with the Dominican court 
and prosecutorial system to improve the administration of 
justice, enhance access to justice, and support 
anticorruption programs. Improvements achieved to date 
include speedier, more transparent judicial processes managed 
by better trained, technically competent, and ethical judges 
who insist upon stricter adherence to due process. The USAID 
program continued to provide training to prosecutors in basic 
criminal justice and prosecutorial skills. Several 
high-profile investigations are ongoing. 
 
The U.S. Department of Justice, through OPDAT, provided two 
weeks of training to prosecutors and investigators on basics 
of money laundering. 
 
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security worked closely with 
Dominican business associations to establish a Dominican 
chapter of the Business Anti-Smuggling Coalition (BASC). 
This voluntary alliance of manufacturers, transport 
companies, and related private sector entities has agreed to 
meet stringent security standards to prevent smuggling by 
means of their operations and to receive surprise inspections 
at any time.  The BASC approach has proven successful in 
other Latin countries in minimizing contraband and promoting 
honest business activity. 
 
A third privately owned airport, at La Romana, joined those 
at Punta Cana and Santiago in upgrading counternarcotics 
measures, including co-funding with the U.S. Government of a 
DNCD canine unit. 
 
The United States is planning to deploy a U.S. mobile 
training team for the DNCD\'s border units and provide 
increased support for Dominican naval patrols of the Mona 
Passage. 
 
With U.S. Customs leadership and DEA support, the Port 
Authority improved security at the formerly chaotic Santo 
Domingo terminal of the ferry to Puerto Rico. An ongoing 
project has improved passenger processing and established 
controls to detect and prevent smuggling of drugs and other 
contraband.  Customs also advised the owners of the new 
Caucedo container terminal, which began limited operations in 
December. 
 
The Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA)-funded Caribbean Center for 
Drug Information at DNCD headquarters now permits real-time 
sharing and analysis of narcotics-related intelligence among 
all the nations of the Caribbean Basin.  Similar centers are 
established in Mexico, Colombia, and Bolivia. 
 
USG training programs have also targeted the DR military\'s 
intelligence units in order to improve their capacity to 
analyze, detect and interdict narcotics shipments.  Two 
military officers received counternarcotics training at Fort 
Benning, Georgia. 
 
The Road Ahead. The immediate U.S. goal remains helping to 
institutionalize judicial reform and good governance. The DR 
and U.S. are working to build coherent counternarcotics 
programs that can resist the pressures of corruption and can 
address new challenges brought by innovative narcotics 
trafficking organizations. 
 
The U.S. Government and the GODR will continue strengthening 
drug control cooperation through sharing of information and 
developing closer working relations among principal agencies. 
The United States will continue providing training and 
equipment for the DNCD, focusing its attention on the 
information technology and intelligence exchange necessary to 
disrupt narcotics smuggling at Dominican land and sea borders 
and at airports. Support for the retraining and 
re-certification of the DNCD canine units will continue, as 
will establishment of new canine units in cooperation with 
DNCD. The DNCD\'s fugitive investigation teams will continue 
to receive hands-on U.S. support for their efforts pursuing 
Dominican fugitives from U.S. justice seeking refuge in the 
DR. The USG will continue to provide support to Dominican 
government and private sector counternarcotics efforts, 
including provision of specialized technical equipment and 
support of business and civil society demand reduction 
efforts. 
 
USAID and the U.S. Department of Justice\'s Office of Overseas 
Prosecutorial Development, Assistance and Training (OPDAT) 
will provide further training to prosecutors and 
investigators, increasing their professionalism and ensuring 
that they are prepared to implement the new Criminal 
Procedures Code when it becomes effective in 2004. U.S. 
support for civil society\'s and the Mejia administration\'s 
efforts to curb corruption will continue, regardless of the 
outcome of 2004 presidential elections, through U.S.-funded 
programs to strengthen the Attorney General\'s Anticorruption 
Prosecution Department and through monitoring and reporting 
compliance with the Inter-American Convention Against 
Corruption. 
 
The USG will continue to work closely with the Anti-Money 
Laundering Commission to ensure full implementation of the 
Anti-Money Laundering Law. 
 
 
Part Two:  Financial Crimes and Money Laundering 
 
Dominican Republic. The Dominican Republic remains a key 
point for the transshipment of narcotics moving from South 
America into Puerto Rico and the United States. The Dominican 
Republic\'s financial institutions engage in currency 
transactions involving international narcotics-trafficking 
proceeds that include significant amounts of U.S. currency or 
currency derived from illegal drug sales in the United 
States. The smuggling of bulk cash by couriers, and wire 
transfer remittances, are the primary methods for moving 
illicit funds from the United States into the Dominican 
Republic. Once in the Dominican Republic, currency exchange 
houses and money remittance companies facilitate the 
laundering of these illicit funds. 
 
In 2003, counternarcotics authorities of the DNCD pursued 
nine cases of money laundering related to narcotics, 
arresting three persons and seizing a total of 29 vehicles, 
18 firearms, 12 buildings, and USD 184,701 in cash.  Most of 
these seizures were connected with one large case. 
 
During 2003, three Dominican banks failed, including the 
third largest in the nation, BANINTER, where some USD 2.2 
billion evaporated over several years.  Failure of two 
smaller banks, Banco Mercantil and BANCREDITO, brought the 
total loss to about three billion. Charges of bank fraud were 
filed against five individuals related to BANINTER, but all 
were later released on bail.  Preliminary investigations 
revealed no useful information as to the sources of the 
missing BANINTER funds or the presence of laundered accounts, 
but despite GODR guarantees for all depositors, several large 
accounts carried on bank books remained unclaimed by the 
owners. 
 
There have been notable legislative and regulatory efforts by 
the Government of the Dominican Republic (GODR) to combat 
drug trafficking, corruption, money laundering, and 
terrorism.  Narcotics-related money laundering has been a 
criminal offense since the enactment of Act 17 of December 
1995 (the \"1995 Narcotics Law\").  The Act allows preventive 
seizures and criminal forfeiture of drug-related assets, and 
authorizes international cooperation in forfeiture cases. 
While numerous narcotics-related investigations were 
initiated under the 1995 Narcotics Law and substantial 
currency and other assets confiscated, there have been only 
three successful money laundering prosecutions under the 1995 
Narcotics Law. 
 
Under Decree No. 288-1996, the Superintendency of Banks, 
banks, currency exchange houses, and stockbrokers are 
required to know and identify their customers, keep records 
of transactions (five years), record currency transactions 
greater than USD 10,000, and report suspicious financial 
transactions (SARs) to the Superintendency of Banks. 
 
In 1997, a Financial Analysis Unit (FAU) was created within 
the Superintendency of Banks to receive, analyze, and 
disseminate SAR information. The FAU also refers SARs to the 
Financial Investigative Unit of the DNCD for follow up 
investigation. The FAU is a member of the Egmont Group, and 
is authorized to exchange information with other Financial 
Intelligence Units. In 1998, the GODR passed legislation that 
allows extradition of Dominican nationals on money laundering 
charges. 
 
In June 2002, the GODR augmented its measures to prevent and 
combat money laundering, drug trafficking, and related 
activities, with the passage of Law No. 72-02.  This law 
expanded the predicate offenses for money laundering beyond 
illicit trafficking in drugs and controlled substances, to 
include other serious crimes such as any act related to 
terrorism, illicit trafficking in human beings or human 
organs, arms trafficking, kidnapping, extortion related to 
recordings and electronic film made by physical or moral 
entities, theft of vehicles, counterfeiting of currency, 
fraud against the State, embezzlement, and extortion and 
bribery related to drug trafficking.  It broadened the 
requirements for customer identification, recordkeeping of 
transactions, and reporting of SARs, to numerous other 
financial sectors including: securities brokers; the Central 
Bank; cashiers of checks or other types of negotiable 
instruments; insurers/sellers/cashers of travelers checks or 
money orders; credit/debit card companies; funds remittance 
companies; offshore financial service providers; casinos; 
real estate agents; automobile dealerships; insurance 
companies; and certain commercial entities such as those 
dealing in firearms, metals, archeological artifacts, 
jewelry, boats, and airplanes. 
 
Law No. 72-02 also requires the reporting of cash 
transactions greater than USD 10,000 to the FAU; until now 
these needed only to be recorded internally by the financial 
institutions.  Moreover, the legislation requires individuals 
to declare cross-border movements of currency that are equal 
to or greater than the equivalent of USD 10,000 in domestic 
or foreign currency. 
 
The GODR responded to U.S. Government efforts to identify and 
block terrorist-related funds.  Although no assets were 
frozen, efforts continue through orders and circulars issued 
by the Ministry of Finance and the Superintendency of Banks, 
instructing all financial institutions to continually monitor 
accounts. On November 15, 2001, the GODR signed, but has not 
yet become a party to, the UN International Convention for 
the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism.  The Dominican 
Republic is a member of the Caribbean Financial Action Task 
Force (CFATF) and of the Organization of American States 
Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission (OAS/CICAD) 
Experts Group to Control Money Laundering.  The Dominican 
Republic is a party to the 1988 UN Drug Convention and a 
signatory to the UN Convention against Transnational 
Organized Crime (December 2000), which is not yet in force 
internationally.  Cooperation with U.S. Government law 
enforcement on fugitive and extradition matters remains 
strong. 
 
Effective implementation of the anti-money laundering law of 
June 2002 constitutes a priority for the Dominican Republic, 
as well as sustained anti-corruption efforts.  The GODR 
should also remain vigilant concerning controls relating to 
its many free zones, which may represent vehicles to 
facilitate money laundering. 
 
 
 
Dominican Republic Statistics 
(1993-2003) 
                  2003  2002  2001  2000  1999  1998  1997 
1996  1995  1994  1993 
Seizures 
 
Cocaine (mt)      1.3   1.1   1.8   1.27  1.01  2.34  1.35 
2.14  3.60  2.80  1.07 
Heroin (mt)       0.059 0.115 0.017 0.020 0.012 0.069 0.008 
0.005 -     -     - 
Marijuana (mt)    0.5   1.7   3.794 2.90  0.18  0.11  0.78 
1.01  1.00  6.81  0.31 
 
Arrests/Detentions 
 
Nationals         3,692 3,857 3,496 4,454 3,918 1,676 1,431 
3,097 3,388 2,810 - 
Foreigners        237   299   212   161   111   -     50 
69    11    158   - 
Total Arrests     3,929 4,156 3,708 4,615 4,029 1,676 1,481 
3,166 3,399 2,968 5,635 
MARSHALL 
"
"13147","1/9/2004 12:41","04SANTODOMINGO150","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03SECSTATE327381","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 000150 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR G/TIP (HOLLIDAY), WHA/PPC (FALLS), WHA/CAR 
(MCISAAC) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM, KWMN, PHUM, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: DOMESTIC VIOLENCE CENTER 
EVALUATION 
 
REF: A. 03 SECSTATE 327381 
 
     B. 03 SANTO DOMINGO 6023 
 
SUMMARY 
 
1. On December 23 NAS Director and emboffs visited the 
drop-in center for victims of domestic violence in Bani to 
gauge its progess since inception in 2001.  Center director 
Bibiana Nunez continues to run the center with limited 
resources but appears motivated to sustain the center\'s 
needed presence.  She reiterated her appreciation for the 
USG\'s fulfillment of requirements outlined in the letter of 
agreement (LOA).  Based on this visit as well as past 
communication (Ref B) the Dominican Government (in this case 
represented by the Secretariat of Women, the National Police 
and the Attorney General) is slowly implementing the LOA but 
much remains to be done.  End Summary. 
 
2. The following are responses to Ref A questions: 
 
Fiscal Responsibility 
a) Embassy NAS office has liquidated the following items: 
 
2001: 
--Office furnishings (desks, chairs, ceiling fans, etc): 
$16,329.79 
--3 computers and printers: $3,084.61 
--Office and kitchen supplies: $8,013.98 
--Solar power: $9,094.77 
 
2002: 
--Installation and repair of solar panels: $2,450 
--Solar energy maintenance: $750 
--2002 Mitsubish Truck: $14,525.14 
 
2003: 
--Canon Copier: $1,180 
--Solar energy removal/reinstallation and electrial rewiring 
at new location: $3,695.17 
 
 
b) Purchased items are in use or have been used appropriately 
by the center.  A substantial portion of program funds was 
spent on relocation expenses due to lease problems with the 
previous landlord.  NAS intended to fund training for center 
personnel in 2002, but funds for this purpose were not 
obligated. 
 
c) GODR expenditures for center operations are disbursed by 
three offices: the National Police, the Attorney General and 
the Secretariat of Women.  The following is a breakdown of 
what each office covers: 
 
National Police 
--1 telephone line 
--3 police officers 
--2 police supervisors 
--1 police chauffeur 
--3 psychologists 
 
Attorney General 
--1 telephone line (to be used for Internet connection) 
--salaries for center director, 1 secretary and 1 courier 
 
Secretariat of Women 
 
SIPDIS 
--monthly rent and utilities 
--salary for 1 social worker (recently assigned in January 04) 
--license plates and car insurance for Mitsubishi truck 
 
Meeting Objectives and Goals 
 
d) The center currently has a staff of thirteen.  Center 
Director Bibiana Nunez told emboffs that all staff have been 
trained on the Dominican Republic\'s Law Against Domestic 
Violence (24-97).  She also said that new staff would be 
trained on the criminal procedures code as well, which is 
scheduled for implementation by September 2004 (septel to 
follow). 
 
e) Legal assistance for victims was limited because the GODR 
has not yet assigned lawyers to the center.  Center Director 
Nunez provides informal legal counsel to clients, but she 
complained that this \"complicates her function as a public 
servant\".  She often performs several tasks at once, from 
director to lawyer to family therapist to social worker.  The 
following are 2003 statistics about services provided by the 
center: 
 
--1,101 appointments 
--138 cases resulted in family therapy 
--175 \"amicable agreements\" reached 
--76 arrest orders issued by National Police 
--465 complaints of domestic violence 
--148 domestic violence cases submitted to justice 
--120 provisional protection orders issued by the Public 
Ministry 
 
f) Medical and psychological services were also limited. 
However, 138 cases involved family therapy as mentioned 
above.  In some instances clients were referred to local NGOS 
due to lack of professional staff.  There are no medical 
professionals currently working at the center.  Center 
Director Nunez reported that whenever a client has an obvious 
medical condition (i.e. bruises, scars) she and/or the police 
chauffeur takes the individual to the local hospital, 
conveniently located across the street.  The three 
psychologists provided by the National Police are 
insufficient to meet demand.  According to Center Director 
Nunez, each of the psychologists works 1-2 days a week but 
there is never more than one psychologist available at one 
time. 
 
g) The drop-in center offered approximately 20 community 
seminars during 2003 to raise public awareness about domestic 
violence and legal penalties.  The center also provides 
numerous brochures and posters to local NGOs and associations 
(including the National Lawyer\'s Association local branch) 
promoting Law 24-97.  The center spearheaded the creation of 
the \"Family Unity Movement\" in the Peravia province in order 
to promote familial responsbility for proper child-rearing 
and education.  According to Nunez, emphasizing the family 
unit is key to preventing domestic abuse.  In addition, the 
Secretariat of Women formed an inter-agency Network Against 
 
SIPDIS 
Domestic Violence in which the drop-in center is involved. 
 
GODR Commitments 
 
h) Center Director Nunez continues to complain that she does 
not receive 100% support from partners National Police, 
Attorney General and the Secretariat of Women.  Each time 
emboffs visit or communicate with her by phone she reminds us 
of a September 2002 embassy-hosted lunch, during which an 
\"informal agreement\" was reached on how GODR responsibilities 
for the center would be divided.  Nunez and emboffs came up 
with a list that was then shared with all interested parties. 
 According to Nunez and embassy records, the following 
circumstances exist: 
 
The National Police agreed to provide 10 full time police 
officers, 2 police chauffeurs and 1 telephone line.  To date 
the police have provided 5 police officers, 1 chauffer, 3 
psychologists, and 1 telephone line. 
 
The Attorney General agreed to provide 1 forensic specialist, 
1 secretary, 1 messenger, and 1 telephone line for Internet 
usage.  The center currently has a secretary and a messenger 
provided by the Attorney General\'s office. 
 
The Secretariat of Women agreed to pay for the center\'s rent 
and utilities, 2 lawyers, 1 social worker, 2 receptionists, 2 
secretaries and 2 porters (watchmen).  To date, the 
 
SIPDIS 
Secretariat has agreed to pay rent for a 3-year lease 
 
SIPDIS 
(although they failed to maintain rent payments at the prior 
locale) and provided 1 social worker who happens to be a 
lawyer.  The Secretariat also agreed to purchase license 
plates and car insurance for the Mitsubishi truck paid for by 
NAS.  These payments, however, were not fulfilled until 
November/December 2003--several months after the vehicle was 
already in use. 
 
Comment and Additional Observations 
 
3. (SBU) Some of the interested parties, namely the National 
Police and the Attorney General, are conveniently using the 
excuse that the LOA was signed between the U.S. Government 
and the Secretariat of Women--not with them.  The 2002 
\"informal agreement\" probably should have been written as an 
LOA addendum in order to hold everyone accountable.  Future 
LOAs should fully consider all the parties required for 
successful implementation.  In hindsight, the Secretariat of 
Women was probably not the best party with whom to sign an 
agreement.  According to NAS Assistant, the Secretariat of 
Women has been described in some conversations with male GODR 
officials as \"a bunch of nagging women.\"  Officials at the 
National Police, the Attorney General\'s offfice, the 
Secretariat of Foreign Relations and some NGOs have a 
 
SIPDIS 
negative impression of the Secretariat of Women as being a 
ministry that is good for looking pretty and talking a good 
game but nothing more. 
 
4. (SBU) Center Director Bibiana Nunez appears to have her 
heart in the right place but she is not very well organized, 
perhaps due to the lack of GODR support and resources.  She 
seems convinced that her Dominican goverment interlocutors 
react only when the U.S. Embassy tells them to jump.  As a 
result, she frequently calls the embassy whenever something 
goes wrong, no matter how big or small.  She remains 
frustrated and suspicious that certain GODR officials are 
looking to oust her due to the perceived close relationship 
she shares with the embassy.  Nunez continues to hang in 
there, knowing that the embassy stands behind the original 
premise of the center\'s establishment--to address a human 
rights concern in the Dominican Republic. 
 
5. (SBU) The drop-in center definitely has areas for 
improvement, but embassy is of the opinion that the project 
was and is necessary.  Future grants and donations are very 
much needed to pursue other priorities (such as trafficking 
in persons).  Economic conditions are not likely to improve 
anytime soon, and many USG-supported projects will rely on 
U.S. funds more than ever, now that the GODR is struggling to 
meet basic everyday commitments. 
MARSHALL 
"
"13170","1/9/2004 23:25","04SANTODOMINGO194","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 000194 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/PPSC, EB/OMA (WONG); 
TREASURY FOR DO:NLEE, RTOLOUI, LLAMONICA; PARIS FOR 
TREASURY ATTACHE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN PROGRAM WITH IMF: HIGH HURDLES, 
UNCERTAIN PROSPECTS, WHILE COGENTRIX POSES A BIG OBSTACLE 
 
 
1.  (SBU) SUMMARY.  On January 7 Econoff and USAID Economist 
called on IMF ResRep Ousmene Mandeng (PLEASE PROTECT) to 
review current status of IMF proposed program.  The GODR has 
completed legislative action on budget items included as 
conditionalities and is close to complying with requirements 
for adjusting finances in the electricity sector.  By 
retaining the August target for monetary growth, the IMF is, 
for now, asking for a virtually unachievable reduction of the 
money supply by 14 percent.  The Central Bank Governor has 
explicitly restated the GODR policy of maintaining a free 
exchange market.  The program makes Paris Club refinancing a 
condition for the announcement of the agreement.  Various 
other conditionalities must be met before the program goes to 
the IMF board.  In sum, the program poses high hurdles and 
offers a holding action which may get the country through 
presidential elections with a dollop of IMF money and 
extensive lending from the IDB and World Bank. This strategy 
could be jeopardized if creditors call sovereign guarantees 
on COGENTRIX loans, blocking IDB lending.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (SBU)  On January 7 Econoff and USAID Economist called on 
IMF ResRep Ousmene Mandeng (PLEASE PROTECT) to review current 
status of IMF proposed program.  The Fund and the GODR are 
finalizing the draft Letter of Intent (LOI), the Memorandum 
of Economic Policy (MOEP), and the Technical Memorandum of 
Understanding (TMOU). There are two sets of prior actions 
that must be implemented before any agreement is approved by 
the Fund Board. 
 
3. (SBU) The first set of prior actions consists of 
pre-conditions to the formal announcement of the LOI and the 
sending of the proposed program documents to the IMF Board 
for approval. There are five components in the first set of 
prior actions: 
 
a.    A budget approved by the Dominican Congress. This 
action has been completed. The final budget negotiations 
resulted in changes of DR pesos 530 million from the original 
budget. The changes, which were acceptable to the Fund 
increased funding for the Congress and NGOs. This increase 
was funded by cuts in pensions and transfer to 
Municipalities, plus a broadening of the range of household 
goods subject to excise taxes. The increased taxes would 
generate DR$170 million, while the balance of  DR pesos 360 
million 0 would come from the expenditure reductions 
mentioned above. 
 
b.    An Electricity Sector Plan to &keep the lights on8 
for the next six months. This plan, which must be approved by 
the World Bank, has three components: 
 
i) tariff increases which must be formally published; 
ii) development of a Statement of Electricity Development 
Policy (to be sent to the World Bank); and 
iii) a detailed cash flow analysis for the next six months 
that shows the electricity sector companies are breaking-even 
by July 2004. 
 
(Two of three requirements have been completed.  The 
electricity tariff increases have been agreed to and 
announced. The new pricing scheme maintains the current 
subsidized rate for those consuming 200 KWH per month, for 
those consuming 200-700 KWH/month the subsidy is maintained 
for the first 200 KWH and the rates are increased 4 pct/month 
for consumption between 200-700 KWH/month, while for those 
whose monthly consumption is more than 700 KWH the subsidy on 
the first 200 will be phased out and the current rate 
increased by 7-8 pct/month until June 2004. Concerning the 
second component, the Statement of Electricity Policy 
Development, this has been done and submitted to the World 
Bank in December 2003. The cash flow analysis has not been 
submitted to the IMF as of yet.) 
 
c.    Reduction in the monetary base. The money supply is 
growing too rapidly and the IMF wants the monetary base to be 
reduced from DR pesos 77 billion to the original August 
target of DR pesos 66 billion (14 percent). This would be an 
enormous challenge, and ResRep indicated that the IMF would 
evaluate this perfomance measure on the GODR\'s good faith 
efforts rather than on achievement of the actual target.  The 
monetary base has grown in part because the holders of 
government certificates were not renewing them as they 
matured. There are several reasons for this reluctance to 
purchase Central Bank issued certificates. One concern is the 
fact that they offer a negative rate of interest. The 
inflation rate at the end of the year was 42 pct while the 
certificates were yielding 32-34 pct. A second concern of 
certificate holders is whether the Central Bank can finance 
the current stock of debt. Many think that the Central Bank 
will be forced to extend the length of maturity of 
certificates held by investors from 7-91 days to several 
years (at present the great majority of the certificates have 
a maturity of 30 days or less). Given these problems, it 
would appear that it will be difficult for the GODR to meet 
this target in the next several weeks. 
 
d.    A freely operating exchange rate market.  In December 
the President announced the formation of a Commission to 
monitor the operations of the exchange houses. At the same 
time the President announced predetermined daily exchange 
rate reduction targets to reduce the exchange rate from 
around DR pesos 44 to DR pesos 30 for one U.S. dollar. The 
consequent actions resulted in a temporary reduction of the 
exchange rate to around DR pesos 34 to one U.S. dollar for 
several weeks. As a result of the government\'s actions, a 
foreign exchange black market appeared with the black market 
rate at around DR pesos 42 to one U.S. dollar. 
 
(On December 30  Central Bank Governor Jose Lois Malkun 
reportedly met principal actors in the exchange rate business 
and told them the GODR would no longer seek to control the 
exchange rate. The dollar began to appreciate. On January 7 
Lois Malkun told journalists, &The policy of the Central 
Bank is not to interfere in the exchange rate, which should 
be set by market forces.  If the dollar rises, let it rise as 
it may.8  The Central Bank posted a public notice in daily 
newspaper Listin Diario on January 8 stressing the GODR 
agreement with the IMF to maintain a free exchange rate and 
advising that projected rates used by analysts in drawing up 
a program were estimates, not mandatory target rates. The 
peso has depreciated from its December strong point of DR 
pesos 34 per dollar to approximately DR pesos 42 as of 
January 9. The black market is said to exist still for those 
in urgent need of large amounts of dollars at short notice 
and may take several weeks to disappear completely.) 
 
As a measure of performance for this issue the IMF is 
requesting that the Government publicly announce the 
elimination of the Commission monitoring the exchange houses. 
In addition the IMF has requested that the Commission on 
Financial Security be eliminated. This latter Commission has 
broad powers that could be used to impact the foreign 
exchange market.  (On January 8 the GODR published extensive 
regulations dated December 18 for the oversight of exchange 
operations.)  The ResRep left the impression that since 
bankers favor keeping this latter Commission to protect 
against credit card fraud and to halt rumors about the 
viability of banks within the country, the IMF might remove 
its objections to this Commission if it broad powers were 
curbed and clarified so as to eliminate the possibility it 
could be used to manipulate the exchange rate. 
 
e.    Financing assurances from the Paris Club. Paris Club 
refinancing is an essential element in the present proposed 
program. Without Paris Club refinancing the program is not 
viable. On January 14, the Paris Club will meet to consider 
the request for refinancing. The Paris Club must approve the 
request for refinancing and will consider the request to move 
the current cut-off date for refinancing from 1984 to the 
present or as close to the present as possible, so as to 
maximize the impact of the refinancing. 
 
4. (SBU) Once the above pre-conditions are satisfied, the IMF 
will be in a position to make an official announcement of the 
agreement and forward the program to the Board. Even so, the 
formal Board Review will be dependent on the GODR meeting a 
second set of conditions. These are: 
 
f.    The Systemic Risk Law must be passed and signed into 
law. This law would among other things address weaknesses in 
the legal framework for addressing banking crises.  (As of 
January 9 the Senate has passed this draft and it has gone to 
the Finance Committee of the House of Representatives.) 
 
Embassy does not have any information at this time on the 
progress toward further remaining conditions: 
 
g.    The Monetary Board must approve regulations for the 
establishment of a contingency fund. The contingency fund 
would be similar to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
in the U.S. 
 
h.    Establishment of a Lombard-style refinancing facility. 
This facility would allow commercial banks facing a liquidity 
problem to borrow from the Central Bank. It is meant to be a 
last-resort lending facility. To discourage banks from using 
it except in emergency situations, the interest rate charged 
by the Central Bank would be substantially above market rates. 
 
i.    Finalization of the Terms of Reference for 
establishment of a panel to evaluate the assets of the two 
electricity distribution companies that the GODR purchased 
from the Spanish company Union Fenosa. This is a follow-up to 
the recommendations of the International Board that reviewed 
the purchase of the distribution companies. The intent is to 
assess whether the price paid was appropriate to the value of 
the companies. 
 
j.    Establishment of a Panel to review the weaknesses of 
the financial system and recommend actions to resolve them. 
The Panel will be charged with reviewing the recent financial 
sector problems to determine their cause, to identify 
weaknesses that need to be addressed and develop 
recommendations to address them. 
 
k.    Clearance of the more than USD 100 million of arrears 
that will not be subject to rescheduling. The GODR has 
recently met urgent financing needs by accumulating arrears. 
The USD 100 million consists of arrears not subject to 
rescheduling under Paris Club.  Given the GODR,s financial 
plight, clearance of the arrears would seem to be possible 
only if the IDB releases the first tranche of its emergency 
loan before the program goes to the Board. 
 
5. (SBU) Once these actions have been completed, the IMF 
Board will meet for approval of the resumption of the 
program. It would appear that the earliest the Fund Board 
could act would be in early February. Once the program is 
approved, the Fund will release a second tranche of USD 60 
million, the only release of Funds until after the May 2004 
elections.  (If a second round of presidential voting is 
required, it will take place on June 30.)  The Fund has 
dropped the monthly reviews of the program with the GODR and 
will not conduct a review until June or July, after the 
elections, and will determine at that time whether conditions 
warrant the release of the third tranche. 
 
COMMENTS ON IMF PROGRAM 
 
6. (SBU)   Emboffs consider this to be a deliberately 
short-term emergency program designed to give the Mejia 
administration the barest chance to make it though the 
presidential elections. Conditionality is strict and 
challenging. The Fund itself is committing very little in 
resources. Almost all the likely funding of USD 300-400 
million will have to come from the IDB and the World Bank, 
and of that amount about USD 100 million must go towards 
arrears before the program goes to the Board. 
 
7. (SBU) Given the upcoming May election, the GODR could well 
have difficulties sticking to such a tight program, even in 
the best of circumstances.  Although the ResRep did not say 
so, the schedule suggests that the IMF will wait until after 
the May 2004 presidential elections to revise or completely 
to renegotiate the program.  The Fund is conserving its 
resources and passing the financing burden to other IFIs over 
the next six months to support the holding action. The 
calendar is not kind, either --  the next GODR will not take 
office until August 16,  and President Mejia is not currently 
favored to win his bid for re-election.  And when the time 
comes to elaborate a new program, the multilateral 
development banks will almost certainly have to stump up just 
as much, and even more than before. 
 
COGENTRIX THREATENS TO PULL THE HOUSE DOWN 
 
3. (SBU)   Further complicating the GODR\'s precarious 
finances is a face-off over arrears due to electricity 
generating firm COGENTRIX.  The GODR has been in arrears to 
the firm since September and technically in default since 
November.  President Mejia continues to refuse to pay 
COGENTRIX unless the management explicitly agrees to 
negotiate lower rates for electricity generation; Mejia says 
that the firm acted in bad faith in mid-2003 when it reneged 
on an understanding that it would negotiate if the GODR 
cleared arrears.  The amount due grows monthly by about USD 
3.7 million, due to a \"take or pay\" clause in the contract. 
According to the terms of the loans, creditors have the right 
to call at any time sovereign guarantees amounting to 
approximately USD 400 million (including penalties) for IDB 
and private sector loans. 
 
4. (SBU) Embassy understands that COGENTRIX creditors have 
given the GODR until January 14 to pay all arrears, amounting 
to about USD 35 million.  Ironically, COGENTRIX is obliged by 
the contract to renew a performance bond of USD 10 million. 
COGENTRIX has requested that the GODR waive this requirement, 
in return for which the creditors offer to extend their 
deadline for payment of arrears a further two weeks, until 
January 29.  A call of the guarantees would have catastrophic 
effects on GODR finances -- it would immediately cut off IDB 
lending (essential to the program defined with the IMF) and 
would lead to a sharp further downgrade of the ratings for 
GODR bonds. This is a commercial dispute between a sovereign 
government and various creditors, including a number of U.S. 
nationals, but it also has important policy implications for 
the USG. The USG role should continue to advise the GODR to 
come to terms, should closely monitor the developing 
situation, and should encourage the IDB to mediate between 
the two parties. 
MARSHALL 
"
"13202","1/12/2004 22:14","04SANTODOMINGO232","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE6404","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 000232 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND EB 
TREASURY FOR OASIS: J.TAYLOR, N.LEE, R.TOLOUI AND L.LAMONICA 
NSC FOR K.MADISON AND H.CRUZ 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/12/2014 
TAGS: EFIN, PREL, DR 
SUBJECT: GODR PRESIDENT MEJIA ON IMF AGREEMENT 
 
REF: A. STATE 6404 
 
     B. GODR PRESIDENT MEJIA,S JANUARY 5 LETTER TO 
        PRESIDENT BUSH 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske for reasons, 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1.  (C)  Summary:  In response to Ambassador,s points drawn 
from reftel A, President Mejia expressed strong support for 
staying the course toward resumption of the IMF standby, 
including maintaining a market-based exchange rate policy. 
He seeks greater flexibility on the part of the international 
financial institutions with respect to payment of arrears to 
Cogentrix, a U.S. independent power producer whose investment 
comes from loans backed by a guarantee from the Interamerican 
Development Bank (IDB).  Continued non-payment of arrears by 
the GODR could derail future IDB lending to the Dominican 
government.  Such lending is a key component of the 
international community,s recovery strategy for the 
Dominican economy.  Thus, Washington agencies should 
encourage the IDB and the GODR (and ultimately the GODR and 
Cogentrix,s creditors) to identify a way out of the impasse. 
 End summary. 
 
2.  (C)  Per instructions (ref A), the Ambassador, 
accompanied by DCM Kubiske, called on Dominican Republic 
President Mejia January 12 to respond to Mejia,s January 5 
letter to President Bush (ref B) by encouraging the GODR to 
stay on course toward resumption of an IMF stand-by 
arrangement, which can result in additional lending by the 
Interamerican Development Bank and the World Bank. 
 
3.  (C)  President Mejia responded that the DR was doing 
\"everything\" to meet the Fund requirements, and that the 
final piece of legislation, the systemic risk law, was due to 
him for signature today. 
 
4.  (C)  Asked about what he meant by the paragraph in his 
letter regarding (quote) taking measures, controversial as 
they might be in financial circles, for the short-term 
stabilization of the economy (unquote), Mejia said he was 
referring to the coming price increases and tax increases 
required by the IMF program.  Everyone would really have to 
tighten their belts now, he said.    Asked specifically about 
his exchange rate policy, Mejia said the GODR is doing what 
the Fund is asking.  He doesn\'t like it, thinks the peso will 
weaken significantly, and thinks this policy will be damaging 
to the country, he said.  That notwithstanding, he added, he 
is, in fact, doing what the Fund wants. 
 
5.  (C)  The Ambassador asked what he had in mind by 
requesting US help to encourage the international financial 
institutions to show more flexibility.  Mejia said he wanted 
more flexibility regarding Cogentrix, the U.S. independent 
power producer with an investment in the Dominican Republic. 
Mejia said he didn\'t want to pay Cogentrix,s creditors when 
the plant was not generating.  We reminded Mejia that the 
creditors had legal rights.  Mejia responded by calling it 
morally wrong for the Dominican Republic to have to pay a 
plant that has been closed for a year.  We explained that 
Mejia,s position could jeopardize the flow of IDB funds to 
the country (given that creditors have had the right since 
November to call the sovereign guarantees on IDB and private 
sector lending, amounting to approximately USD 400 million). 
We encouraged him to share his views with IDB - Enrique 
Iglesias. 
 
Comment and Next Steps 
------------------------------- 
Mejia seemed very pleased with the legislative actions 
supporting the Fund program and was emphatic he would 
continue down the path to resumption of the IMF program. He 
left a strong impression that he is still committed to this 
policy path, with all that this implies ) including allowing 
the exchange rate to be determined by the market. 
 
It appears from this conversation that the GODR and 
Cogentrix,s creditors are at an impasse.  The best hope may 
be for a senior representative of the IDB to meet with Mejia 
to discuss the matter, in search of a way forward; otherwise, 
we may be headed for a train wreck of IDB lending, which 
constitutes a pillar of the international community support 
for the Dominican economy,s recovery. 
 
On January 14-15 Washington agencies will have an opportunity 
to talk directly with Carlos Despradel, Mejia,s Technical 
Secretary and key member of the economic team to get more 
 
SIPDIS 
information and share views.  Despradel understands the 
implications of the situation but has told us repeatedly that 
he has been unable to change the President,s mind on this 
issue.  End comment. 
HERTELL 
"
"13203","1/12/2004 22:39","04SANTODOMINGO233","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO147","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 000233 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), WHA/OAS (IRVING), DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION SERIES #14: SLOGANS AND A 
SPECIAL SESSION OF CONGRESS 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 00147 
 
1.  (SBU) Following is no. 14 in our series on the Dominican 
presidential elections: 
 
SLOGANS AND A SPECIAL SESSION OF CONGRESS 
 
The controversy over a proposed election law change (reftel) 
is heading for a climax.  On January 10 President Mejia 
announced that he would extend the current special session of 
the legislature and officially notified the President of the 
Senate. The additional special session got underway this 
afternoon (September 12). President Mejia said the extension 
was requested not solely to consider the ruling PRD-friendly 
\"Law of Slogans\" election measure, but also to approve \"seven 
or eight very important bills that are in Congress, such as 
the Law on Systemic Risk in the Banking Sector.\" 
 
January 12 press reports indicate that after a scrub of the 
draft proposal, representatives of four PRD candidates have 
convassed the Congress and believe they have enough support 
to pass a revised \"Law of Slogans\" bill. Ruling PRD leader 
Tirso Mejia Ricart now claims intellectual authorship, rather 
than little known and often absent legislator Henry Saraff. 
The PRD is counting on its own congressional votes, plus four 
or five from the opposition Social Christian Reform Party 
(PRSC). (As one columnist dryly noted, \"There\'s always the 
man in the corridor with a few thousand pesos in his attache 
case.\")  As reported reftel, if the bill does become law, it 
will be challenged, probably in the Supreme Court and the 
Disputes Chamber of the Central Electoral Board (JCE).  Press 
accounts indicate that the most recent version of the bill 
would allow prospective candidates to register directly with 
the JCE, as an alternative to registering with party 
organizations, and thus circumvent obstacles posed by party 
splits.  To comply with the letter of the Constitution that 
requires a direct vote for president, the draft law is likely 
to stipulate that the winner obtain a majority of all votes 
cast -- as does the current electoral law. 
 
THIRD PLACE AND CRUMBLING 
 
The executive committee of the opposition PRSC met January 10 
for three hours and issued a weakly supported resolution 
against the \"Ley de Lemas\" proposal. Running a distant third 
in the Presidential campaign, the PRSC remains plagued by 
uncertain and divided leadership.  Presidential candidate 
Eduardo Estrella chaired, but only 32 of the 50 members of 
the executive committee attended; of those, only 19 signed 
the  resolution directing PRSC members of Congress to vote 
against the bill. Of the 35 PRSC  congressional 
representatives, just 14 were present. 
 
The PRSC division and dilemma overweighed the bold text of 
the resolution, since only 38 percent of the executive 
committee signed and less than half of the PRSC congressional 
representatives were present. 
 
Estrella is unhappy with the PRD electoral maneuver, since if 
it is carried through, it could shift emphasis in the first 
round from individual candidates to parties.  The PRSC had 
already planned to hold a national congress this month. 
Assuming that Estrella\'s rival Jacinto Peynado (or a 
stand-in) chooses to run, the PRSC first-round vote is likely 
to be larger than would otherwise be the case, and therefore 
the PRSC might constitute a more convincing swing factor. The 
PRSC \"third wave\" could be Federico (\"Quique\") Antun Batlle, 
distant from both of them, who told journalists that because 
of \"mean-spirited, out-of-phase opponents\" within the party 
he felt pushed to convene his followers and the mid-level 
leadership of the party to formalize his own campaign, known 
by its \"slogan\" QAP (Quique Antun Presidente). 
MEANWHILE, AT THE FRONT OF THE PACK 
 
As for front-runner Leonel Fernandez, he bought prime time on 
television stations and radio on Sunday night to attack the 
PRD initiative as an irresponsible attempt to \"abort\" the May 
election \"with force and payoffs.\"  He asserted that polls 
show him with 63 percent of the vote, \"43 points more than 
all the PRD pre-candidates combined.\" Fernandez quoted 
Mejia\'s comment in a television interview last week -- 
\"Political power is there to be used\" -- and hammered away at 
it.  Power is not to be used to intimidate the Chamber of 
Deputies into accepting a new president; power is not be used 
to set up a sham Electoral Board; power is not to be used to 
show disrespect for civil society, the church, private 
business, etc., etc., etc. . . After months of trips abroad 
for colloquia and trips to the regions for party conclaves, 
Leonel was angry, passionate, eloquent, and very much back on 
the national scene. 
 
2.  (U) Drafted by Angela Kerwin, Michael Meigs. 
HERTELL 
"
"13307","1/15/2004 22:53","04SANTODOMINGO355","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SANTODOMINGO233","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 000355 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA, WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: ELECTIONS # 15 - PEACEFUL DEMONSTRATIONS AS 
DOMINICAN CONGRESS POSTPONES DISCUSSION ON \"SLOGAN LAW\" 
 
REF: A. SANTO DOMINGO 00233 
 
     B. SANTO DOMINGO 00147 
 
1.  Following is no. 15 in our series on the Dominican 
elections. 
 
CONGRESS POSTPONES DISCUSSION ON \"SLOGAN LAW\" 
 
Dominican President of the Chamber of Deputies Alfredo 
Pacheco, postponed the January 15 congressional committee 
session when a block of Social Christian Reform Party (PRSC) 
congressional representatives walked out.  Since PLD congress 
reps were deliberately absent already, as previously 
threatened, this left the chamber without a quorum.  The 
first point on today\'s agenda was to have been a discussion 
on the revised version of the controversial \"slogan law\" 
(reftels A and B).  Pacheco announced that the bill would be 
placed on the agenda for debate next week. 
 
PRSC spokesperson Luis Reyes Ozuna said that the 
representatives had abandoned their posts at the direction of 
party leaders.  Reyes Ozuna took a swipe at the rival PLD, 
saying that PRSC members felt oppressed by them. \"With the 
PLD buses bringing people here, this is no way to legislate.\" 
 
The planned demonstrations against the \"slogan law\" were 
probably supported in part by the PLD, as the party that has 
the least to gain from the law.  However, most prominent 
among the peaceful crowd of several hundred were civil 
society groups Participacion Ciudadana (PC) and Fundacion 
Institucionalidad y Justicia (FINJUS). They carried placards, 
waved copies of the Constitution and sang. 
 
The \"slogan law\" has become a hot topic in political circles, 
rivaling stories on USTR Robert Zoellick\'s visit and FTA 
negotiations.  The full civil society \"Elections Monitoring 
Commission\" headed by Msgr Agripino Nunez met January 14 and 
endorsed their board\'s unanimous rejection of the draft law. 
A full-page ad in \"Hoy\" on January 15 signed by 60 retired 
police and military officers -- half of them formerly of flag 
rank -- fiercely rejected the proposal as unconstitutional. 
The omnibus NGO \"Coalition for Transparency\" petitioned House 
of Representatives President Pacheco to stop action on the 
proposal because of its unconstitutionality. 
 
Proponents of the law had already agreed to submit it to the 
Supreme Court for an advisory opinion after passage but 
before the signature into law.  Our own reading of the 
revised version of the \"slogan law\" -- now labeled the 
\"preferential vote law\" -- as circulated earlier this week is 
that it conflicts directly with Article 90 of the 
Constitution (\"When no candidate obtains an absolute majority 
of the valid votes, a second election will be carried out 45 
days later.  Participants are limited to the two candidates 
who obtained the greatest number of votes in the first 
election.\") The PRD-sponsored draft provides in contrast that 
\"participants in a second round are limited to the leading 
candidates of the two parties having received the most valid 
votes in the first round.\" 
 
President Mejia\'s three in-house PRD rivals have been 
scrambling.  Early in the week they declared that they would 
join forces and back one of their number under the proposed 
new arrangements.  On Wednesday they jointly filed a petition 
to the Supreme Court to declare unconstitutional certain 
articles of the current Electoral Law which requires 
candidates for the presidency to be sponsored by a political 
party. 
 
President Mejia is in a \"win-win\" situation on this issue. 
The PRD convention is scheduled to go ahead on Sunday, 
January 18, with Mejia running against two relative unknowns 
and certain to take the nomination.  He will be on the 
ballot, no matter what the outcome of the \"slogan law\" debate. 
 
 
2.  Drafted by Angela Kerwin. 
HERTELL 
"
"13308","1/15/2004 23:14","04SANTODOMINGO356","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 000356 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, DS, WHA/EX, WHA/CAR; DEPT PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: PEACEFUL DEMONSTRATIONS IN SANTO DOMINGO 
 
 
1.  Peaceful demonstrations were staged today in Santo 
Domingo outside the hotel housing USTR-GODR negotiations on a 
free trade agreement and outside the National Congress.  Both 
were orderly and relatively limited in scope. 
 
2.  At the Jaragua Hotel, headquarters for the January 12-16 
opening round of the bilateral free trade agreement, about 50 
demonstrators protested briefly against the proposed 
agreement and more particularly against expected concessions 
in agriculture.  The demonstration occurred as scheduled and 
announced.  Speaking later that day to the American Chamber 
of Commerce in the same hotel Chief negotiator Regina Vargo 
acknowledged the protest event and stressed that U.S. 
negotiators are seeking to understand Dominican sensibilities 
on all aspects of the proposed agreement. 
 
3.  Outside the National Congress a peaceful gathering of 
several hundred members of civil society non-governmental 
organizations made speeches, waved banners and carried copies 
of the Constitution in a protest against a draft bill seeking 
changes in the electoral arrangements for the May 2004 
presidential elections.  Well known civic leaders led the 
gathering.  Congress was not in session, since a boycott by 
opposition legislators meant that no quorum was present. 
 
4.  These protests were relatively limited in attendance and 
in scope.  Labor organizations have called for a two-day 
strike on January 27 and 28 (following a national holiday on 
January 26).  There is a possibility of more vigorous protest 
country-wide on those dates.  Economic conditions continue to 
be difficult, although the country is not currently 
experiencing the wide-spread electricity blackouts that gave 
a further stimulus to last November\'s national strike. 
HERTELL 
"
"13351","1/16/2004 21:23","04SANTODOMINGO391","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE10423","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 000391 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) AND IO/SHA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/26/2009 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, DR 
SUBJECT: CHR 60 DEMARCHE DELIVERED TO GODR 
 
REF: STATE 10423 
 
Classified By: Ecopol Counselor Michael Meigs. reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
 
1. Poloff delivered reftel points to GODR Deputy Desk 
director for International Organization, Ambassador Rhadys 
Abreu de Polanco, on January 16, 2004.  Ambassador Abreu said 
the GODR supports Australia as Chair of the 60th session. 
She will share our request with the Head of International 
Organizations, Ambassador Jesus Maria Hernandez.  Post will 
report any substantive response in septel. 
 
HERTELL 
"
"13388","1/20/2004 17:06","04SANTODOMINGO406","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO355|04SANTODOMINGO356","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 000406 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA-FRIEDMAN, WHA/PPC, DRL/PHD, WHA/OAS 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, PGOV, EAID 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTIONS #16: OAS OBSERVER MISSION IN 
THE WORKS 
 
REF: A. (A) SANTO DOMINGO 355 
     B. (B) SANTO DOMINGO 356 
 
1. (SBU) Following is number 16 in our Dominican presidential 
election series: 
 
      OAS PROPOSES ELECTION OBSERVER MISSION 
 
OAS Special Adviser Santiago Murray, from the Secretariat 
General\'s Unit for the Promotion of Democracy, on January 15 
called on the Central Election Board (JCE) and this Embassy 
(poloff and USAID staff) to discuss possible arrangements for 
an OAS observer mission during the upcoming presidential 
campaign and election.  Murray proposed a technical mission 
of some 25 specialists in election management, legal aspects, 
and technology including information technology.  Training 
for judges of the municipal election boards would be on the 
agenda.  At least part of the mission would be on the ground 
during most of the campaign (which is expected to begin 
officially o/a January 20; election day will be May 16) and 
would remain afterward during the vote count and any 
challenges.  Murray\'s minimum cost estimate was 200,000 U.S. 
dollars for a mission that would need to draw on locally 
available resources to achieve adequate coverage. 
 
In our conversation with Murray, we strongly supported the 
proposed OAS observer mission.  Nearly all our contacts, in 
the political parties and civil society, want international 
observation to build public confidence in the elections, in 
the current tense political atmosphere (reftels) and a 
country where electoral fraud was common until a decade ago. 
We urged the OAS to have a continuous presence during the 
entire election process and expressed hope that the formal 
invitation would be expedited so detailed planning could 
begin.  We mentioned the Department\'s and Embassy\'s ongoing 
effort to identify funding for the OAS observers and offered 
to work closely with them and any other international 
observers. 
 
Murray told us the JCE had promised to send a formal 
invitation before the end of January.  He undertook to draft 
a detailed proposal, with cost estimates, which he would 
share by e-mail with the Embassy.  He also raised the idea of 
involving locally posted foreign diplomats in the 
international observation effort, since the OAS observer 
mission, with the minimum proposed funding, could not provide 
country-wide coverage.  He said OAS already has experience in 
working with diplomatic observers.  We strongly concurred and 
noted the Ambassador was already participating in a 
\"mini-Dublin Group\" of ambassadors who are monitoring the 
election process and urging the GODR to ensure a clean 
election. 
 
Pro-government daily \"Listin Diario\" on January 16 reported 
Murray\'s visit to five of the nine JCE judges.  JCE president 
Luis Arias reportedly \"had no problem\" with the proposed 
observer mission and indeed welcomed it as \"an opportunity 
for the people to become aware that the high court (JCE) is 
acting with transparency.\"  Murray described the planned OAS 
role as facilitating communication between the JCE and 
political parties, to channel any complaints from them to the 
JCE and assist in delivering satisfactory responses to the 
parties.  He said points of interest for the observers would 
include municipal election boards, information systems, and 
voter registration rolls. 
 
Following through promptly with the invitation, funding, and 
planning for OAS observers will be essential.  The OAS 
observer mission has the potential to become the centerpiece 
of international election observation here from February to 
May, and perhaps through the end of June if the elections go 
to a second round.  By their presence, the OAS observers 
would add a new dimension to the already planned domestic 
observation organized by the USAID-supported NGO \"Citizen 
Participation\" (Participacion Ciudadana - PC).  The proposed 
lean mission of technical experts could extend its reach 
through local diplomats as \"force multipliers.\"  The 
diplomats, below ambassadorial level, could receive 
orientation on election monitoring from the OAS experts and 
NGOs such as PC, before going out as formally accredited or 
informal election observers.  Embassy will continue its 
dialogue with the JCE to urge that the invitation be sent. 
 
2.  (U) Drafted by Bainbridge Cowell. 
KUBISKE 
"
"13393","1/20/2004 23:06","04SANTODOMINGO414","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO355","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 000414 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, PGOV 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION #17: MEJIA\'S PRD PRIMARY - A 
VICTORY FORETOLD 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 355 (NOTAL) 
 
1. (SBU) This is number 17 in our series on the Dominican 
presidential election: 
 
      MEJIA\'S PRD PRIMARY - A VICTORY FORETOLD 
 
President Mejia, running virtually unopposed in the ruling 
PRD\'s presidential primary January 18, won about 95 percent 
of the vote, with his sole opponent Frank J. Thomen -- a 
political unknown who ran to provide an appearance of 
competition -- picking up the remainder.  The Central 
Election Board (JCE), at the PRD\'s request, provided 32 
official observers to circulate at the PRD-organized polls, 
located in non-government premises.  Former president and PRD 
leader Salvador Jorge Blanco termed the primary \"a total 
success\" and claimed that as many as half of the party\'s 
nearly 1.8 million registered members had participated. 
Published partial returns showed nearly 574,000 votes tallied 
and a projected total of 733,000 votes, far more than in the 
PRD primary in 1999 or in the December rump primary that was 
declared illegal by the JCE.  President Mejia pronounced 
himself \"satisfied\" with the results. 
 
Dissident PRD leaders, including Vice President Milagros 
Ortiz-Bosch, Tourism Secretary Rafael Subervi, Enmanuel 
Esquea, and PRD president Hatuey De Camps, refused to 
participate in the primary, alleging that the process was 
illegitimate and tainted by fraud -- \"a farce,\" De Camps 
called it.  They charged that, by going ahead with the 
primary, Mejia had deepened factional divisions in the PRD. 
 
Government-owned \"Listin Diario\" ran big headlines about a 
\"massive\" turnout, and the PRD ran two-page newspaper ads 
with photos showing lengthy queues at various polling sites 
around the country.  Pro-PRD daily \"Caribe\" provided low-key 
coverage of a \"timid\" turnout in a \"calm\" atmosphere, and 
populist \"El Dia\" reported a \"lack of enthusiasm\" at many 
voting centers and a lower turnout in Santo Domingo than 
elsewhere.  Long lines at some polling sites in the northern 
Cibao Valley were attributed by \"El Dia\" to disproportionate 
voting by public employees, and \"Listin\" reported 
exceptionally high turnout in the Southwest, where Mejia\'s 
PPH faction of the PRD was said to be strongest.  Mejia\'s 
campaign director Agriculture Secretary Eligio Jaquez 
acknowledged on television that voters had taken longer than 
usual to show up at the polls the morning of election day. 
One coercive incident was reported, the theft of a ballot box 
containing 100-200 ballots. 
 
In the capital, turnout appeared moderate.  One of Mejia\'s 
palace advisers told us he had to wait in line 45 minutes to 
vote and observed between 60 and 120 voters at each of 5 or 6 
sites he visited around mid-day.  Poloff\'s casual observation 
of one polling place revealed 6-12 voters at any one time, 
plus 4-5 poll workers and several poll watchers; a 
truck-trailer prominently parked nearby bore a sign -- 
\"Presidency of the Republic: Plan of Social Action.\" 
 
The results left Mejia as the virtual, although not yet 
formally nominated, PRD candidate; a convention of delegates 
is expected to complete this process January 25 or later. 
With no other primaries scheduled, the Central Election Board 
(JCE) on January 20 announced the formal beginning of the 
election campaign and invited political parties to register 
their candidates between now and March 16. 
The chief candidates lost no time in ramping up for the 
campaign.  Mejia\'s staff announced a whirlwind agenda for the 
President to tour the country between now and election day 
inaugurating public works -- roads, schools, dams, aqueducts 
-- which in time-honored tradition have been timed to boost 
his candidacy against his number one adversary in the May 16 
election, former president Leonel Fernandez (PLD). 
 
Fernandez\'s party claimed to have contacted 5 million voters 
(of 5.1 million registered nationwide) in a door-to-door 
verification of voter lists on the PRD\'s primary day, 
providing a distraction for news media and drawing criticism 
from an irritated President Mejia.  Fernandez and two senior 
advisers flew to Washington January 19 to meet with the IMF, 
World Bank, and IDB (and thus appear presidential).  Leonel 
should be back in country by the end of the week for 
announced campaign activities in advance of a \"nationwide 
march\" of PLD supporters January 26. 
 
The PRSC announced that its candidate, third-ranked Eduardo 
Estrella, would accelerate his campaign to publicize 
proposals to deal with economic problems and thus attract 
enough votes to place second in the election and go on to a 
possible runoff. 
 
All this left the four dissident PRD candidates marginalized, 
but not yet out. Their petition to the Supreme Court, 
alleging inconstitutionality of the voting law (reftel), has 
so far generated no action by the court.  Their possible 
alternative may lie in the stalled proposal to amend the 
election law and allow up to five candidates from each party 
to run in the general election (reftel).  Congress postponed 
debate on the controversial measure until at least next week, 
but Mejia has given the go-ahead to his legislators to 
attempt to negotiate passage.  One of the most influential 
dissident PRD candidates, Subervi, told the press January 20 
that he also backs the legal change.  According to our 
contacts, the balance among the legislators is too close to 
call. 
 
The President further called on \"all the internal political 
forces of the PRD\" to \"mount on the horse\" of his candidacy. 
Ironically, what began as a maneuver by the PRD dissidents to 
circumvent Mejia\'s primary and defeat his reelection bid 
could become a tool for him to bring them back into the fold, 
play to their ambitions to run for president, and keep their 
PRD constituents from deserting to Leonel Fernandez on May 16. 
 
Another wild card in the pre-election game will be a national 
strike being advertised for January 28-29 to protest social 
and economic problems and the government\'s policies.  It is 
being organized by the \"Coordinator of Popular 
Organizations,\" one of the entities involved in a similar 
action last November that degenerated into sporadic violence. 
 A small leftist party participating in the event has posted 
notices with President Mejia\'s photo and the blunt message, 
\"Why wait any longer?  He should quit now!\"  The tactics of 
the President and the police in handling that challenge will 
have a resonance during the campaign. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Bainbridge Cowell. 
KUBISKE 
"
"13481","1/23/2004 19:28","04SANTODOMINGO469","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE11998","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 000469 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/USOAS, WHA/PPC, WHA/BSC, AND S/CT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PTER, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: CICTE DELEGATION TO FOURTH 
REGULAR SESSION 
 
REF: STATE 11998 
 
 1.  Poloff delivered reftel talking points to GODR Deputy 
Director of International Organizations Desk, Ambassador 
Rhadys Abreu de Polanco.  Ambassador Polanco said that the 
GODR delegation to the Fourth Regular Session of the OAS 
Inter-American Committee Against Terrorism (CICTE) will be 
headed by Ambassador Jorge Santiago, Head of Legal Affairs 
and Lead Counsel for the GODR Foreign Ministry.  The GODR has 
ratified the Inter-American Convention Against Terrorism and 
has sent its annual report to CICTE.  Any further substantive 
response to talking points will be delivered septel. 
HERTELL 
"
"13483","1/23/2004 23:04","04SANTODOMINGO473","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO233","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 000473 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/OAS, DRL/PHD 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, PGOV, EAID, EU 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTIONS #18: UN, EU AND OAS REPS 
ENGAGE ELECTORAL AUTHORITIES 
 
REF: A. (A) SANTO DOMINGO 233 (NOTAL) 
 
     B. (B) SANTO DOMINGO 406 
 
1. (SBU) Following is number 18 in our Dominican presidential 
election series: 
 
 
 
UN, EU and OAS Reps Engage Dominican Electoral Authorities 
 
 
 
A UN Mission, Soon 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
UN Resident Representative Niky Fabiancic informed the 
Ambassador and poloff on January 12 that the UN Elections 
Division would send a two-person technical mission -- not 
election observers -- to Santo Domingo soon to advise the 
Central Election Board (JCE) on how to remedy its 
deficiencies.  \"Whatever the JCE\'s weaknesses,\" he commented, 
\"It is the official body in charge of the elections and 
should be supported by the international community in the 
interest of a transparent and clean electoral process.\"  The 
UN expects to defer to the OAS on sending international 
election observers.  The Ambassador agreed with these goals 
and offered the Embassy\'s collaboration.  He emphasized our 
\"zero tolerance\" approach to any electoral fraud. 
 
Fabiancic considers that the Board suffers from chronic 
problems of organization and human resources, rather than 
political bias of the nine judges.  He pointed to antiquated 
procedures and incorrect data in the civil registry (the 
basis for voter lists). Fabiancic says that chief judge of 
the JCE administrative chamber Nelson Gomez, in charge of 
election logistics, and the other two judges of that chamber 
have shown \"good will\" to do the job right. The UN technical 
mission expects to offer training for judges of municipal 
election boards and perhaps other assistance. 
 
Fabiancic expressed his personal reservations about a 
controversial \"Ley de Lemas\" proposal to amend the election 
law, now under consideration in Congress (Ref A).  He finds 
it \"inopportune\" and untimely, just four months prior to 
election day (May 16).  He thought the \"tense\" atmosphere 
would last until the a vote on the measure, January 15 (later 
postponed in the face of a legislative boycott and civil 
society protests).  Fabiancic said that the drafters had 
deleted a provision that votes for all the candidates from 
the same party would go to the highest vote-getter among 
them.  The bill attempts to approximate the direct-vote 
requirement of the constitution, he commented, with a second 
round between the winning candidates of the two most-voted 
parties in the first round (assuming no candidate gets more 
than 50 percent of the vote). The Ambassador replied that the 
bill was perceived by President Mejia\'s critics as a power 
grab, but that to date the proponents had been proceeding 
within the law.  Fabiancic\'s staff subsequently informed us 
that the UN technical mission would be postponed until the 
\"Ley de Lemas\" issue had been resolved. 
 
EU Ambassador offers elections assistance 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
EU Ambassador Miguel Amado has featured in recent weeks in a 
newspaper back-and-forth polemic with JCE head Arias, 
repeatedly expressing EU \"concern\" about the electoral 
arrangements.  Arias has expressed surprise at Amado\'s 
remarks and in a January 18 television interview shot back, 
\"It\'s one thing to observe and another to meddle in the 
internal affairs of the JCE.\"  Op-ed commentators have 
defended Amado, arguing that as party to the Cotonou 
convention on EU assistance, the Dominican Republic granted 
the EU the privilege of assessing national political 
developments. 
On January 12 Amb. Amado told the Ambassador and DCM the same 
day that the JCE judges as \"politicized,\" a concern he 
intended to communicate to JCE President Luis Arias.  Amado 
criticized the \"Ley de Lemas\" bill as costly and disruptive 
to electoral preparations.  The Ambassador commented that 
despite the public perceptions of it, for now he prefers to 
avoid taking sides on the legislation.  On January 13, Amado 
and an EU legal adviser met with Arias and offered financial 
support from an EU aid fund for training of Dominican 
personnel who would oversee the election process.  The EU 
Mission later confirmed to us that the EU would not provide 
international election observers. 
 
OAS surveys need for observers 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
In a related development, special adviser to the OAS Unit for 
Promotion of Democracy Santiago Murray visited the JCE, the 
Embassy, and other entities here on January 15 to discuss a 
possible OAS election observer mission. (Ref B). 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Bainbridge Cowell. 
HERTELL 
"
"13542","1/27/2004 16:39","04SANTODOMINGO483","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 SANTO DOMINGO 000483 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND EB 
STATE PASS USTR FOR ZOELLICK AND VARGO 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC 
NSC FOR SHANNON, MADISON, AND CRUZ 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, ETRD, EAID, EFIN, PGOV, PREL, OVIP, OREP 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: USTR ZOELLICK LAUNCHES FTA 
NEGOTIATIONS 
 
 
1.  (U) Summary.  U.S. Trade Representative Amb. Robert 
Zoellick told Dominicans on January 15 that bilateral free 
trade agreement (FTA) negotiations offer an opportunity for 
new engagement, economic growth and strengthened 
institutions. He stressed that an FTA, free and fair 
presidential elections and a renewed IMF agreement are the 
three essential elements for overcoming the \"difficult year\" 
just past.  Amb. Zoellick met President Mejia and his 
cabinet, the congressional leadership, civil society 
organizations, leading press and media commentators, and 
opposition presidential candidates.  Congressman Jerry Weller 
(R-IL) accompanied the USTR during much of the visit, 
providing a perspective on legislative requirements and 
prospects.  Dominicans generally held the same view as 
leading opposition candidate Leonel Fernandez: that no one 
was against free trade but the public needed to be better 
informed about the negotiations.  The first round of 
bilateral talks moved forward, with both sides publicly 
expressing satisfaction on the technical content and the 
cordial relations at the bargaining table.  Amb. Zoellick 
noted in private meetings that economic growth in the 
Dominican Republic would also provide indirect help to the 
population of Haiti.  End summary. 
 
2.  (U) U.S. Trade Representative Robert Zoellick carried out 
a full program in Santo Domingo on January 15 to launch the 
negotiations between the Dominican Republic and the United 
States on a free trade agreement.  The Ambassador, DCM, and 
chief negotiator Assistant USTR Regina Vargo accompanied him 
throughout the program. At the presidential palace, after 
conferring briefly with lead Dominican negotiator Secretary 
of Industry and Commerce Sonia Guzman, he participated in a 
full discussion with President Mejia and his economic 
cabinet.  Following a press opportunity there, he called on 
congressional leaders at the Senate president\'s office and 
spoke with business leaders at a luncheon offered by the 
Ambassador.  The USTR party visited the new, modern container 
port at nearby Caucedo (an investment in cooperation with 
U.S. firm CSX) and then went to the Catholic University 
(PUCMM) for exchanges with non-governmental organizations 
representing civil society and small and medium enterprises. 
Amb. Zoellick concluded the day with an hour-long press 
roundtable with editorialists from leading newspapers and 
media outlets.  On January 16 he met separately with 
opposition presidential candidates Eduardo Estrella (PRSC) 
and Leonel Fernandez (PLD) before an early morning departure. 
 
3.  (U) USTR Zoellick,s message to all interlocutors 
revolved around the same core elements: 
 
- - The U.S. government understands that Dominican Republic 
has had a difficult year.  The government, Congress and civil 
society have had to take hard decisions. 
 
- - There are \"three legs\" to support the country,s 
recovery: free, fair and transparent elections to reinforce 
legitimate institutions and to provide a stable base for 
relations; a renewed agreement with the IMF to set the 
conditions for financial stability; and a free trade 
agreement to permit the country to benefit from new 
opportunities in international trade. 
 
- - Trade talks are part of a larger bilateral relationship; 
the USG wishes to work closely with the GODR on each of the 
three elements, including support with the international 
financial institutions. 
 
- - As for timing, the Dominican authorities have been 
working for almost two years to prepare for these talks.  The 
U.S. is pleased to offer a partner -- the Dominican Republic 
-- a priority place in the U.S. trade agenda. 
 
- - The world is changing and countries that wait will be 
disadvantaged.  China and India, for example, will not wait. 
The expiration of quotas on textiles at the end of 2004 will 
directly affect trading opportunities and require innovation 
and adjustment. 
 
- - Zoellick and U.S. negotiators want to understand 
Dominican needs and sensitivities, so that the sides can 
mutually decide how to move ahead.  Tools are available, 
including safeguard measures and gradual phase-ins.  An FTA 
should provide benefits for both sides -- beyond those of the 
Caribbean Basin Initiative -- and will assure a better 
climate for investment and job creation. 
 
- - The text defined for the Central American countries 
(CAFTA) builds on those negotiated with Chile and with 
Singapore and is comprehensive in scope.  U.S. negotiators 
anticipated issues of concern to the Dominican Republic and 
included them -- one example being the treatment of duty 
draw-backs.  Special consideration was afforded the Central 
American countries in sectors of special sensitivity, with 
lengthy phase-in periods -- for dairy, some reached 20 years. 
 
- - The agreement will require governments to adhere to 
standards of transparency and procedure that will reinforce a 
competitive environment.  They will give greater access to 
small and medium businesses and will reduce the advantages of 
those previously enjoying privileged treatment. 
 
- - Assistance in building trade capacity is essential.  It 
can be channeled through the USG, through multilateral 
development banks, via the sector or through non-governmental 
organizations. 
 
- - Regard for labor standards and for environmental 
standards is essential and is included in the text.  Parties 
will undertake to enforce their own laws. 
 
GODR MEETINGS 
 
4.  (SBU) President Mejia led the meeting with the GODR 
cabinet, breaking protocol to emphasize the importance of the 
FTA talks and his personal involvement. Attending along with 
Secretary Guzman were Finance Secretary Rafael Calderon, 
 
SIPDIS 
Secretary of Foreign Relations Guerrero Prats,  Secretary of 
 
SIPDIS 
Labor Ray Guevera, Secretary of Environment Moya Pons, 
Intellectual Property Commissioner Jorge Mera, Assistant 
Governor of the Central Bank Calvo, and Commissioner for 
Foreign Investment Galvan.  Mejia commented that Dominican 
monopolists and oligopolists were pretending that there was 
no need to open the economy, a view he found disingenuous. 
Mejia said that as the private sector understands the 
seriousness of U.S. negotiators, they will understand the 
advantages of an agreement. 
 
5.  (SBU) President Mejia reaffirmed his \"will and iron 
position\" to complete the IMF agreement and to comply with 
what he signs.  The President noted that the Fund 
preconditions were 90 percent complete.  He said that he was 
alarmed by the exchange rate, but added that government 
policy is for a free market rate, one the government cannot 
control.  Referring to currency speculation, he commented 
that the dollar-earning sectors of the economy do not 
understand their social and economic responsibility. 
 
6.  (SBU) Central Bank Deputy Governor Calvo said the GODR 
needed more time to meet the monetary targets, alleging that 
recent developments had hurt the country\'s ability to comply. 
 (Note: The Central Bank Governor subsequently sent a letter 
to Secretary Snow, which Embassy has forwarded to Treasury, 
asking for understanding of the GODR non-compliance with the 
reduction in monetary base.)  Calvo also raised the topic of 
dollarization of the economy (apparently without prior 
coordination), stating that studies suggest that this might 
be feasible.  USTR Zoellick asked whether this topic had been 
raised at the OAS special summit in Monterrey on January 
12-13. 
 
7.  (SBU) Mejia indicated that he had participated in a 
20-minute meeting with Secretary of State Powell, during 
which President Bush had stopped in to greet presidents. 
Mejia told USTR Zoellick that fifteen minutes of that meeting 
had focused on Haiti, for which, Mejia commented, \"there is 
no solution.\"  Mejia added that France and Canada should take 
on more responsibility for addressing problems in Haiti. 
Zoellick noted that recovery for the Dominican economy would 
provide indirect benefits to Haiti.  Mejia agreed, noting 
that a million Haitians are currently in the Dominican 
Republic. 
 
CONGRESS 
 
8. (SBU) Congressman Jerry Weller (R-IL) joined the USTR 
party at the office of Senate President Jesus Vasquez.  The 
Dominican side included House of Representatives President 
Alfredo Pacheco and committee chairs for foreign relations, 
industry and trade, and finance from both houses.  In the 
course of discussion, Amb. Zoellick acknowledged the 
misgivings of Dominican producers of pork and poultry and 
undertook to be sensitive to local needs.  He stressed the 
importance of labor laws and of enforcement, particularly the 
laws against child labor and trafficking in persons.  He 
commented that reductions in tariffs under an FTA would 
require fiscal adjustments over a transition period; lowering 
tariffs and increasing competition on basic goods and 
consumer commodities would directly benefit the poorest 
Dominicans. (Q: WHAT DID THE DOMINICAN SIDE SAY?) 
 
9. (SBU)  Congressman Weller commented that legislative 
approval of the FTA would be difficult for both countries in 
an election year and asked that the legislators help explain 
the FTA\'s benefits to their constituents and to Dominicans 
living in the U.S. through the Dominican American Roundtable 
and other organizations. 
 
10.  (SBU) Senate President Vasquez noted that the Dominican 
Congress and Executive have assigned a liaison group of 
legislators to follow the FTA negotiations, keep other 
members updated, and answer any questions they might have. 
He hoped the IMF negotiations could be concluded as quickly 
as possible and said his country had \"advanced greatly\" in 
conducting free and fair elections and would not backslide to 
the irregularities of earlier times.  House of 
Representatives President Pacheco and a committee chairman 
spoke of their concerns about the high costs of maritime and 
air freight.  One committee chairman appealed for more aid 
from the international community for reconstruction of Haiti, 
\"which cannot be at the expense of the Dominican Republic\" 
(Note: Providing services to illegal Haitian migrants.  End 
note.)  Amb. Zoellick replied that one of the best ways to 
help Haiti would be to develop the Dominican economy next 
door. 
 
OPPOSITION CANDIDATES 
 
11.  (SBU) Amb. Zoellick hosted breakfast meetings at his 
hotel for PRSC candidate Eduardo Estrella and for PLD 
candidate Leonel Fernandez.   Estrella opened with the 
affirmation that he supports an FTA and was one of the first 
to request it.  Pork and poultry are sensitive sectors; 
tariffs need to be reformed generally and customs must apply 
them in transparent fashion.  He is concerned about 
corruption in the customs service and in general; this will 
be a theme of his campaign.  Amb. Zoellick noted that an FTA 
will lower the cost of corn as an input to the livestock 
sector.  The United States is a pork exporter, so that sector 
is a supporter for free trade; however, the U.S. side will 
deal in a sensitive manner with sensitive subjects.  Estrella 
spoke of his support for competition and openness in 
government procurement, an area where the FTA could help.  He 
expects to make this point during campaign trips to New York 
and New Jersey.  He outlined his concerns about maneuvers 
affecting the Dominican presidential elections and commented 
that the proposed draft changes to the electoral law would 
create confusion and could open the door to massive fraud. 
 
12. (SBU) In contrast to Estrella,s focused approach, PLD 
candidate Leonel Fernandez focused first on the presidential 
election.  In campaign speech style, he recalled the 
flourishing of the Dominican economy during his 1996-2000 
presidency.  The 2000 elections had been fair.  President 
Mejia had made untimely decisions and mismanaged fiscal 
policy, wage rates, public sector employment and debt. 
During his own presidency, he said, the government had stood 
in the background to the private sector; in contrast, 
Mejia,s administration has made itself central.  Debt has 
risen from the equivalent of 18 percent of GDP to more than 
50 percent.  Mejia had shown his authoritarian tendencies 
with constitutional amendments and the imposition of judges 
for the Elections Board (JCE).  Fernandez,s PLD wants a code 
of conduct for the JCE.  He said that political primaries do 
not work in the Dominican context but rather encourage 
fragmentation.  The country needs international election 
observers.  Special attention should be paid to auditing 
computer systems and their use. 
 
13.  (SBU)  Amb. Zoellick outlined U.S. views on the FTA and 
the need for an IMF package and agreed on the importance of 
free and fair elections.  Fernandez noted that talks coincide 
with the presidential election campaign, in which polls 
currently show him receiving 63 percent as opposed to 15 
percent for Mejia.  When Zoellick asked Fernandez for his own 
opinion about the FTA, Fernandez commented that farmers were 
uncertain about the proposals, especially the producers of 
rice, pork and chicken.  U.S. farmers are subsidized while 
Dominicans are not.   The Dominican Agricultural bank is 
decapitalized, the United States imposes non-tariff barriers 
and the GODR is imposing (temporary) export taxes.  Farmers 
see the FTA as benefiting primarily the free trade zones. 
 
14.  (SBU) Amb. Zoellick characterized negotiations as a 
\"problem solving exercise\" -- building in measures to deal 
with prevailing conditions, such as high interest rates in 
pesos and U.S. producers, complaints about low wages abroad. 
 He stressed the utility of the transparency required by the 
FTA.  Dominicans resident in the United States could help 
persuade U.S. legislators to accept a CAFTA/Dominican 
Republic agreement. 
 
15. (SBU)  \"There is no real rejection of free trade by 
Dominicans,\"  replied Fernandez, \"either here or there.\" 
There was apprehension, however, and a need to educate people 
and advertise the advantages of an agreement. 
 
16.  (SBU) Amb. Zoellick mentioned competition in services 
and the interest in reducing the costs of remittances from 
the United States.  Fernandez agreed, citing a study done by 
CUNY,s Dominican Studies Center.  Remittances are about USD 
2.2 billion, he said, which is about 10 percent of the 
earnings of Dominicans in the United States and equivalent to 
about 10 percent of Dominican GDP.  He agrees that an FTA is 
part of a larger development process.  Amb. Zoellick closed 
by emphasizing that with financial stability secured with IMF 
help, an FTA can create a turnaround for the Dominican 
economy. 
 
CIVIL SOCIETY AND PRESS ROUNDTABLES 
 
17. (SBU) A roundtable at the Pontifical Mother and Master 
Catholic University, chaired by Rector (and prominent 
political mediator) Msgr. Agripino Nunez, included some 
eighteen economic, environmental,  legal, justice reform, 
small and medium business, and labor experts.  Participants 
agreed there were concerns about the fast timetable for the 
FTA negotiations, perceived shortcomings in CAFTA, and a 
potential negative impact on the Dominican Republic\'s jobs, 
small businesses, and environment. Amb. Zoellick emphasized 
the lengthy preparatory work on both sides and the extensive 
customizing to the proposed draft for the Dominican Republic. 
 He pointed to comprehensive environmental, regulatory, and 
transparency provisions in the draft and the potential of an 
FTA to create opportunities for small and medium enterprises 
and benefit consumers by opening up competition.  Amb. 
Zoellick also referred to USAID\'s trade capacity building 
program and related IFI financing.  He said the FTA could 
enable a bilateral partnership to solve problems together and 
help the Dominican Republic enforce its own labor and 
environmental laws. During an hour-long discussion with 
senior editorial board members and media representatives, 
Amb. Zoellick stressed that the U.S. intention was not 
limited to encouraging trade; instead, it is to create an 
opportunity for growth, development, support for the rule of 
law, a link to the U.S. economy, and points of leverage for 
domestic reform processes. 
 
COMMENT 
 
18.  (SBU) Amb. Zoellick delivered the message on free trade 
and in providing another strong demonstration of U.S. 
interest and concern for the economic plight of the hard 
pressed Dominicans.  He received extensive press coverage -- 
his photo and visit were the only items above the fold on the 
next day\'s \"Listin Diario.\" We expect favorable op-ed comment 
to follow. 
 
19.  (SBU) His was an upbeat modulation on the U.S. 
diplomatic and public diplomacy approach. In November 
Treasury Under Secretary Taylor listened to Dominican 
concerns about a dire economic situation, reflected them back 
to interlocutors and provided steady reassurance that a 
solution was possible through the IFIs, with U.S. support. 
In December, Assistant Secretary of State Noriega continued 
that message and added the strong U.S. concern about 
institutional weaknesses, election arrangements and 
corruption.  USTR Amb. Zoellick explicitly included those 
themes in his visit and linked them to the promise of 
recovery and the opportunities of competition and free trade. 
 
 
20.  (U) The presence of Congressman Weller and his comments 
were a further demonstration of the seriousness of the U.S. 
side and its intention to see the free trade negotiation 
process through to a successful conclusion.  Meanwhile the 
first round of bilateral talks went forward January 12-16 
without incident, with both sides expressing satisfaction on 
the technical content and the cordial relations at the 
bargaining table. 
 
21.  USTR has reviewed this cable. 
HERTELL 
"
"13553","1/28/2004 0:40","04SANTODOMINGO490","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO355|04SANTODOMINGO414","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS E F T O SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 000490 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, DRL, AND CA 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/27/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, ELAB, ASEC, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: NATIONAL WORK STOPPAGE SET FOR 
JAN. 28-29 
 
REF: A. (A) SANTO DOMINGO 355 
     B. (B) SANTO DOMINGO 414 
 
1. (SBU) A national work stoppage (\"huelga\" in Spanish), set 
for January 28-29, is likely to disrupt or close down many 
businesses across the country and cause scattered violence in 
low-income neighborhoods of the capital and smaller cities. 
The Coordinator of Popular and Labor Organizations promoting 
the work stoppage includes community, student, and labor 
groups and small leftist parties -- essentially the same 
coalition that prompted a similar \"huelga\" November 11, which 
left eight persons dead.  The goal is to protest the 
government\'s economic policies, depressed economic 
conditions, and rising prices of basic consumer goods.   The 
leftist \"Force of the Revolution\" has also distributed 
posters calling for President Mejia\'s resignation, but other 
striking groups have disavowed that demand.  Anticipating the 
larger stoppage (and repeating an action a year ago), doctors 
in public hospitals on January 27 walked out to demand higher 
salaries and more equipment and medicines, paralyzing all but 
emergency services. 
 
3. (U) President Mejia appointed an interagency commission 
headed by Labor Secretary Milton Ray Guevara to dialogue with 
the strike organizers, who have refused the offer. Ray 
Guevara said the commission stands ready to meet with them 
\"wherever they decide\" and expressed readiness to deal with 
the issues, except some demands that would be impossible to 
meet, such as doubling wages or suspending the IMF accord. 
The Archbishop of Santiago supported the proposal of 
dialogue, other church and civic leaders, and officials of 
the three main political parties have called for peaceful 
behavior by strikers and authorities. 
 
4. (SBU) Front-running presidential candidate (former 
president) Leonel Fernandez (PLD), during a campaign march in 
Santo Domingo January 26, told thousands of flag-waving 
marchers that the people \"have ample reason to protest\" 
because of economic and social problems and claimed that 
President Mejia in seeking re-election intended to \"create a 
dictatorship.\"  PRSC candidate Eduardo Estrella said publicly 
that people had become \"desperate\" economically and that he 
supported the strike. 
 
5. (SBU) There is widespread anxiety in the media and among 
our contacts about potential violence during the strike. 
Some of our sources claim that opposition parties and PRD 
dissidents are distributing money to agitators to provoke 
violence and make President Mejia look bad.  We have heard of 
telephoned threats to businesses that did not close during 
the November strike, urging them to act differently this 
time.  In a pre-strike demonstration at the Autonomous 
University of Santo Domingo on January 23, students threw 
rocks and burned two vehicles before police took control.  An 
official told us that on the main highway north of the 
capital January 27, protestors blocked the road, beat a truck 
driver, threw rocks at passing motorists, and provoked police 
to fire in the air. 
 
6. (SBU) The National Police will provide the visible 
security presence on streets, with the military kept in 
discreet reserve.  Police began pre-emptive arrests of 
suspected strike organizers January 26 -- a practice banned 
by legal reforms announced in 2003 -- and, according to the 
press, searched the home of a labor leader without a warrant 
January 27.  Police roadblocks on access roads into Santo 
Domingo, to apprehend any weapons being brought into the 
city, caused traffic tie-ups January 27.  Official sources 
told us the police would enter poorer neighborhoods to try to 
confine rock throwing or tire burning to small areas, but 
would withdraw at nightfall.  Consquently, authorities expect 
disorders to increase around dusk.  Police have identified 
several areas of the capital and northern towns such as 
Navarrete and Bonao as likely venues for \"intense\" protests. 
A detailed list of such locations is available on 
www.usemb.gov.do . 
 
7. (SBU) The work stoppage comes just before expected 
disbursements by international financial institutions and 
against a backdrop of political tension as the election 
campaign gets underway.  The ruling PRD was set to 
reintroduce a bill to amend the electoral law (Ref A) -- 
which most opposition politicians oppose -- in the Senate 
where passage would be guaranteed by an overwhelming PRD 
majority.  President Mejia, following his victory in a 
primary that was boycotted by other serious PRD candidates 
(Ref B), was planning a January 31 convention to confirm him 
as the controversial candidate for re-election.  Vice 
President Milagros Ortiz Bosch, one of the President\'s 
strongest challengers in the PRD, reassumed her post as 
Education Secretary January 26 and ceased most of her 
campaign activities, prompting speculation that she would 
drop out of the presidential race. 
HERTELL 
"
"13567","1/28/2004 12:20","04SANTODOMINGO502","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 000502 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND EB 
TREASURY FOR OASIS: J.TAYLOR, N.LEE, R.TOLOUI AND L.LAMONICA 
NSC for H. Cruz 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, PREL, ENRG, DR 
SUBJECT:  Electricity Sector Shutting Down in the Dominican 
Republic 
 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  As more power plants shut down, GODR and 
energy sector representatives in public recriminations. 
Negotiators are close to an agreement that would put 
Cogentrix back on line.  End summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) Nine representatives of the electricity sector 
briefed the Ambassador on January 23 on the meetings they 
had last week in Washington with State, Treasury, NSC, IMF, 
IBD and WB.  They described the system as \"close to 
bankruptcy.\"  Representatives of the generating companies 
described one by one the date that each generating plant 
will be shut down for lack of fuel.  The sector estimates 
that by the end of January, the country will be back to 
generating about half of the daily peak demand. 
 
3.  (SBU) Company representatives assert that approximately 
$200 million is needed immediately to buy fuel and avert 
bankruptcy of at least two of the companies.  However, if 
the cash is not accompanied by actions on tariffs and 
subsidies, the system cannot recover because even with the 
new rates that took effect January 1, the wholesale price of 
electricity is below the retail cost -- and the GODR 
continues to accumulate arrears on subsidy payments.  The 
pricing gap has been growing daily as the value of the peso 
continues to decline. 
 
4.  (SBU) Technical Secretary of the Presidency Carlos 
Despradel himself considers it impossible for the GODR to 
seek to subsidize energy, particularly as the peso devalues. 
\"We should tell people we have to pass along the full price, 
just the way we do with gasoline.\"  He acknowledged, 
however, that decisions on these matters are not his 
responsibility and beyond his ability to influence. 
 
5.  (SBU) In the meantime, Secretary of Finance Calderon 
appeared on television January 25 and in local papers 
accusing the generators of extortion and blaming them for 
the blackouts.  He rebuffed recommendations the sector had 
presented to the GODR and denied that the GODR owed even 
\"one penny\" to Virginia-based AES, which is the largest 
investor in the sector.  He said if the companies are 
bankrupt, \"why not declare it?\" 
 
COGENTRIX 
---------- 
 
6.  (SBU) Since the Dominican Republic has been in a 
perpetual electricity crisis, it would be tempting to 
believe that as they have done so many times before, 
government officials will pull a rabbit out of the hat and 
keep the system going.  The rabbit might be a deal with 
Goldman Sachs, new owners of COGENTRIX, which is currently 
in negotiations with the government concerning approximately 
$35 million in arrears.  COGENTRIX has full fuel tanks, so a 
settlement could put 300 MW on line quickly.  Despradel told 
emboffs on January 23 it appeared that Goldman Sachs would 
reduce the amount required to $24 million if $12 million 
were paid promptly.  Cogentrix sources have since confirmed 
agreement on a $16 million payment, but with a firm demand 
for cash by January 29, or company lenders will call the 
Inter-American Development Bank guarantees. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
7.  (SBU) Failing a COGENTRIX deal, we would expect 
increasing long blackouts during the next two weeks 
and cannot entirely rule out the possibility of a system 
shut down.  This means the country will again be living with 
prolonged blackouts that will intensify as the country 
braces for a national strike, enhancing public discontent 
and the possibility for vigorous protest. 
HERTELL"
"13581","1/28/2004 20:44","04SANTODOMINGO535","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE14340","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 000535 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AC/ISN, IO/UNP, WHA/CAR; USUN (POL) AND 
GENEVA (CD) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PARM, DR 
SUBJECT: GRULAC DEMARCHE DELIVERED TO GODR 
 
REF: STATE 14340 
 
1. Poloff delivered reftel talking points and non-paper to 
Ambassador Rhadys Abreu de Polanco, Deputy Director of the 
International Organizations desk at the Dominican Foreign 
Ministry.  Ambassador Abreu had no immediate comment. Any 
information received on the GODR\'s candidate to chair the 
59th UNFC Session will be forwarded via septel. 
HERTELL 
"
"13582","1/28/2004 20:45","04SANTODOMINGO536","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE13279","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 000536 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G, DRL, IO AND WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM, PREL, PHUM 
SUBJECT: DEMOCRACY CAUCUS AT CHR DEMARCHE DELIVERED 
 
REF: A. STATE 13279 
 
     B. STATE 11840 
 
1.  Poloff delivered reftel talking points to Ambassador 
Rhadys Abreu de Polanco, Deputy Director of the International 
Organizations Desk at the Dominican Foreign Ministry on 
January 27, 2004.  Ambassador Abreu said she would pass on 
the information to the Director of International 
Organizations, Ambassador Jesus Maria Hernandez.  Any 
substantive response from the Foreign Ministry will be 
reported septel. 
HERTELL 
"
"13584","1/28/2004 22:44","04SANTODOMINGO537","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","04SANTODOMINGO490","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 000537 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, DRL, AND CA 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/28/2006 
TAGS: PGOV, ELAB, ASEC, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN WORK STOPPAGE, JAN 28-29: STREETS ARE 
DESERTED 
 
REF: A. (A) SANTO DOMINGO 490 
     B. (B) IIR 6 827 0045 04 (NOTAL) 
 
1. (SBU) Most businesses were shuttered and schools were 
closed for the January 28-29 national work stoppage in the 
Dominican Republic, called by a coalition of community, 
labor, student, and political groups to protest economic and 
social policies. Banks and supermarkets were open but 
neighborhood groceries (\"colmados\") were not. As of late 
afternoon, streets in Santo Domingo were generally calm with 
light traffic. There was virtually no public transport, other 
than an occasional bus operated by the  government public 
transit company, usually with police riders aboard.  The 
ports were receiving and unloading ships but there was no 
transport available to move containers out of port areas. 
 
2. (SBU) As in the November one-day strike, police carried 
out sweeps ahead of time to arrest likely troublemakers. 
Police were deployed throughout the country, with their 
presence heaviest in towns with a history of civil 
disturbances.  The military were in the barracks, except for 
some heavily armed military patrols in at least three 
northern towns including Puerto Plata, two towns in the 
Southwest, and remote neighborhoods of the capital. 
 
3.  (SBU) A senior police official told us three persons were 
arrested from January 27 to early January 28, by police 
accompanied by a prosecutor\'s office representative, and were 
immediately released.  The official said about a dozen 
persons have been detained for burning trees or disturbing 
the peace. 
 
4.  (C) President Mejia sent an advisor to the Embassy at 
mid-day on January 28 to assure the political officer that 
authorities had \"absolute control\" of the situation.  Mejia 
addressed the nation yesterday evening to urge calm and to 
deplore the \"3 billion pesos\" in economic activity likely to 
be lost to the strike. 
 
5.  (SBU) Some of our contacts are apprehensive about 
possible disturbances in the evening hours.  Others consider 
that the strike is likely to continue without event or even 
to peter out tomorrow. 
 
6. (SBU) Military and intelligence contacts say that violent 
incidents have occurred in Salcedo and Navarrete in the 
north, and homemade bombs have detonated in several interior 
towns with minimal damage.  Morning rotestors in two 
neighborhoods of Santo Domingo burned two cars, knocked down 
trees, and threw rocks.  Burning tires were reported in a 
dozen  locations in the capital.   An industrial free zone at 
Las Americas International Airport near Santo Domingo closed 
during the day upon receiving reports that sharp objects were 
being strewn on the airport highway -- but in mid-afternoon 
Embassy personnel found the highway open and unobstructed, 
with no signs of protest. 
 
7. (SBU) Our sources comment that if serious disturbances 
occur, they are more likely to begin at nightfall. Security 
forces withdraw patrols from rough neighborhoods at night, 
although they will maintain perimeters. 
 
8. (SBU) Opposition political party contacts deny rumors that 
they are paying protesters to stir up trouble.  Our contacts 
believe that anti-Mejia political leaders would not engage in 
such tactics, although neighborhood party members might. They 
recalled the brief demonstrations at Santo Domingo university 
UASD on the afternoon of January 23, during which masked 
youths burned a vehicle and police responded with tear gas 
volleys. 
 
9. (SBU) On January 27, the day before the formal strike, 
medical personnel at public hospitals shut down routine 
outpatient care, with demands for a doubling of salaries; 
GODR health officials said they had agreed to speed up 
disbursements to the health sector but did not offer 
increases.  President Mejia said he would consider strikers\' 
demands for higher pay, provided they helped lobby Congress 
for the increase.  A GODR medical official told us the Mejia 
administration has already taken measures to improve 
equipment and working conditions at the hospitals.  Private 
hospitals and clinics used by Embassy personnel were not 
affected by the strike. 
 
COMMENT 
 
10. (SBU)  So far, the echoing silence of the work stoppage 
has provided everyone evidence of a national consensus that 
Dominicans are unhappy with economic conditions, inflation, 
and electricity blackouts.  The absence of organized protests 
today contrasts eerily with Monday\'s well-attended PLD 
cavalcade on the Duarte Day national holiday and with Tuesday 
night\'s midnight parades across town by fans celebrating the 
championship of Santo Domingo baseball team Licey.  We expect 
that the political campaigns will channel Dominican energies 
over the months between now and the May 16 first round vote. 
HERTELL 
"
"13618","1/29/2004 23:51","04SANTODOMINGO593","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO7094","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 000593 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR G/TIP (LINDERMAN), WHA/PPC (FALLS), WHA/CAR 
(MCISAAC) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PREL, KJUS, SMIG, DR 
SUBJECT: ALIEN SMUGGLING TRIAL FOR DOMINICAN CONGRESSMAN 
POSTPONED AGAIN 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 7094 
 
1. (SBU) Trial proceedings against accused alien smuggler 
Congressman Guillermo Radhames Ramos Garcia were postponed 
again on January 28 after his lawyer failed to appear in 
court.  Lawyers for the two co-defendants did not appear 
either.  The trial will resume at the Supreme Court on March 
24.  Additionally, a bail hearing for the two Asian 
co-defendants is scheduled for February 5. 
 
2.  (SBU) On January 20 Attorney General Victor Cespedes 
recommended bail be set for the two Asian co-defendants at 
100,000 pesos each.  Each defendant would be required to post 
2 per cent of that amount, approximately 40 USD. The Court 
adjourned without acting on the bail recommendation. 
Newspaper reports indicate that there was sharp disagreement 
among the justices on this subject, both in open session and 
afterwards in chambers. 
 
3. (SBU) Comment: This most recent postponement of the 
Radhames Ramos Garcia case is the second in just two months. 
The Attorney General\'s suggested bail amount is unusually 
low.  EcoPol counselor called on the AG on January 22 to 
express concern that once set free on bail, these defendants 
would flee the country and thereby undermine the case. 
Cespedes was categoric to EcoPol Counselor and the next day 
to the Ambassador during an unrelated ceremony: he says that 
the case is a strong one, with documentary evidence and other 
witnesses, and that the co-defendants are not needed. 
Cespedes said that his office will continue the prosecution 
and expects to achieve a conviction. 
HERTELL 
"
"13629","1/30/2004 10:48","04SANTODOMINGO594","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03SANTODOMINGO5691|03SANTODOMINGO7304","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 000594 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/C, INL/LP, INR/IAA, PM/PPA, PRM/ENA, WHA/PPC, 
AND WHA/CAR 
JUSTICE FOR OIA, AFMLS, AND NDDS 
JUSTICE PLEASE PASS U.S. ATTORNEY SAN JUAN 
TREASURY FOR FINCEN 
DEA FOR OFI/MARRERO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, SMIG, KJUS, EWWT, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ILLEGALS: USDOJ AND USCG ACTION REQUEST 
 
REF: A. IIR 6 827 0090 03 
     B. 03 SANTO DOMINGO 5691 
     C. IIR 6 827 0009 04 
     D. IIR 6 827 0021 04 
     E. 03 SANTO DOMINGO 7304 
 
1.  SUMMARY AND ACTION REQUEST:  This interagency message 
presents the unified views of cognizant agencies at Embassy 
Santo Domingo on the current surge of illegal migrant travel 
from the Dominican Republic to Puerto Rico.  Present efforts 
by Dominican and American officials are inadequate to 
counteract this trend.  In Embassy\'s view, the only sure way 
to stem the migrant flow is to provide negative consequences 
for the smugglers.  FOR U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE:  Embassy 
strongly urges that the U.S. Attorney\'s office in San Juan 
give immediate high priority to prosecution of immigrant 
smuggling cases.  FOR U.S. COAST GUARD:  Embassy requests 
that Coast Guard cutters assigned to the Mona Passage be 
equipped with the IDENT system or similar gear.  See Comment, 
paras. 12-14, for rationale. 
 
BACKGROUND 
---------- 
 
2.  A significant surge in illegal emigration from the 
Dominican Republic followed the end of the 2003-04 holiday 
period.  The plunging peso and soaring prices for food, fuel, 
and other necessities have driven many families to entrust 
one or more members to the perils of the Mona Passage to 
Puerto Rico.  Embassy estimates from reports and field visits 
that five to ten rickety homebuilt vessels (yolas) are 
leaving Dominican beaches on any given night in January 2004, 
each carrying between 30 and 100 passengers.  During a recent 
two-day period, American authorities intercepted five yolas 
in the Mona and discovered eight more abandoned on Puerto 
Rican shores. 
 
3.  Interviews with intercepted migrants indicate that 
recently proposed changes in U.S. immigration law, which 
would permit some illegal immigrants to regularize their work 
status, may have contributed to the current surge.  Migrant 
smugglers usually exploit rumors of changes in U.S. 
immigration law to persuade potential customers that the time 
is right to emigrate. 
 
THE GROWING PROBLEM 
------------------- 
 
4.  Measuring a clandestine migrant population is always a 
challenge.  However, indications are that the best combined 
efforts of American and Dominican authorities are 
intercepting about half the illegal migration traffic headed 
toward Puerto Rico.  Extrapolation from recent (and possibly 
optimistic) U.S. Coast Guard estimates places the January 
2004 projected total flow at about 2500 migrants, of which 
perhaps 1000 will land and not be apprehended.  NOTE:  \"Total 
flow\" as defined by the Coast Guard includes 1) Coast Guard 
interdictions, 2) other U.S. law enforcement agency 
interdictions (Border Patrol, ICE), 3) other country (e.g. 
Bahamas) interdictions, 4) successful landings.  This \"floor\" 
figure does not include 1) migrants who perish at sea, 2) 
successful landings we never learn about.  The \"total flow\" 
number permits year-to-year comparisons but does not reflect 
total migration attempts.  END NOTE. 
 
5.  In December 2003, a more typical month, Dominican Navy 
Intelligence reported arrests of 241 nationals, 30 
foreigners, five yola captains, and five trip organizers, 
plus 173 illegals received from the U.S. Coast Guard, for a 
total of 454 persons and 33 vessels intercepted.  During all 
of 2003, the Dominican Navy seized 421 vessels and detained 
5,096 persons.  Virtually all of those persons were quickly 
released, due to lack of judicial and political interest in 
these cases, the perception of victimless crime, and the fact 
that trip organizers and captains are rarely identified by 
their passengers.  Several migrant smugglers have been 
detained for several months by Dominican authorities, but 
none has been convicted.  Those few migrants possibly willing 
to testify against the smugglers are often silenced by 
threats or promises of another voyage for free before the 
matter can be fully investigated, and Dominican legal 
sanctions for smuggling are few when drugs are not involved. 
 
6.  U.S. Coast Guard officers report that an increasing 
number of voyagers are paying for their trips by carrying 
drugs.  Evidence of such activity is difficult to gather in 
the confusion of a chase at sea, but ion scans of some yolas 
have shown presence of drug residue.  Another trend is that 
Coast Guard boarding parties are now encountering refusals to 
stop and even thrown rocks, brought on board for that 
purpose.  High-powered boats from Puerto Rico also offer 
clandestine ferry service for high-paying illegal migrants, 
typically detouring far north of the Mona to evade the Coast 
Guard and landing their passengers east of San Juan. 
 
7.  Most of the Dominican yola passengers, typically between 
18 and 40 years of age, have paid a few hundred to a thousand 
dollars for their voyage.  A few of those are gang members 
previously deported from the U.S. after serving their jail 
terms.  Once a boatload reaches a Puerto Rican beach, the 
occupants scatter, making interdiction difficult.  Cubans, 
assured of an asylum hearing once their feet touch American 
soil, pay about three times the Dominican price for their 
voyage.  Some migrants, unable to pay the fees up front, work 
off their debts in various unpleasant ways, including 
prostitution and gang membership.  Exotic aliens, such as 
Chinese, may have paid up to ten times the Cuban price.  The 
diversity of nationalities using routes through the Dominican 
Republic raises concern that terrorist organizations may do 
the same.  Highly sophisticated smuggling rings offer their 
services to those who can pay their fat fees.  Regardless of 
their motives and ability to pay, the ultimate destination of 
nearly all intending migrants is the United States.  And of 
those intercepted en route, a large percentage try again, and 
again, until they succeed. 
 
DOMINICAN COUNTERMEASURES 
------------------------- 
 
8.  The Dominican Navy is America\'s best ally in the fight 
against illegal migrant traffic.  The Navy routinely disrupts 
yola departures along the nation\'s beaches, at an average 
rate of 35 per month during 2003.  Shore patrols from the 
Navy\'s many coastal outposts are credited with most of the 
successful interceptions.  The Navy shore patrols also seize 
fuel, motors, and other equipment necessary to a successful 
crossing.  The poorly educated men who serve in the run-down 
coastal stations, built around the island at twenty-kilometer 
intervals during the Trujillo period, are underpaid and, 
these days, often unpaid.  They typically live without 
electricity or proper sanitation, preparing their rice and 
beans over a back yard fire when there is no gas for the 
stove.  They patrol on foot at night for lack of motorized 
transport, usually with only a shotgun to enforce a squad\'s 
authority. 
 
9.  The Dominican Navy has assisted U.S. Coast Guard cutters 
by ferrying intercepted migrants back to the Dominican 
Republic.  The Navy normally operates on a shoestring budget, 
further pinched at present by the government\'s dire economic 
situation, and fuel for such operations is scarce.  At the 
present moment, NAS and MAAG have arranged to pay for fuel 
and rations in support of Operation Congri, in which 
Dominican patrol craft are patrolling the Mona Passage in 
rotation, under U.S. Coast Guard operational control.  As NAS 
funds are not normally spent on fuel for military operations 
of other nations, Dominican cooperation in this operation 
will be limited to two weeks.  During the first week of 
Operation Congri, just completed, a Dominican patrol ship 
intercepted two yolas and repatriated the passengers, saving 
the U.S. cutter on the Mona station a lengthy detour to La 
Romana. 
 
10.  The Dominican Government has assisted with the illegal 
migration problem in other ways.  In May 2003 the Embassy 
team negotiated the signing of a landmark agreement for 
maritime migration enforcement, the first of its kind in the 
region.  In that agreement the Dominican Government allowed 
overflight and immediate repatriation of migrants caught at 
sea, including third party nationals.  Without that 
agreement, the current difficulties of the U.S. Coast Guard 
and Border Patrol would be multiplied. 
 
EMBASSY COUNTERMEASURES 
----------------------- 
 
11.  During 2003, Embassy Santo Domingo provided the 
Dominican Navy with three new Zodiac patrol boats and 
equipped the Trafficking In Persons unit of the National 
Police with computers to keep track of their cases.  As 
discussed above, Embassy is currently providing fuel and 
rations for Dominican participation with the U.S. Coast Guard 
in Operation Congri.  To help meet the challenge of the 
current migration surge, the Embassy will soon co-sponsor 
with Dominican civil society, the private sector, and 
international organizations an intensive public information 
campaign emphasizing the hazards of yola travel, the 
untrustworthy nature of smugglers, and the difficulties of 
life as an illegal immigrant in the United States.  To 
supplement meager Dominican detection resources, the Embassy 
will request Coast Guard consideration of assigning 
additional resources to the Mona as well as temporary use of 
the C-26 aerial sensing platform based in Barbados.  However, 
none of these efforts is expected to slow the flow of 
intending migrants in any dramatic measure. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
12.  Embassy\'s considered view is that the only sure way to 
stem the migrant flow is to provide negative consequences for 
the smugglers.  While there are Dominican laws against human 
smuggling, the Dominican justice system is either unwilling 
or unable to enforce them.  American law provides penalties, 
but to Embassy\'s knowledge, no maritime migrant smuggler has 
been convicted in Puerto Rico in recent history.  The 
difficulties of obtaining evidence and ensuring testimony 
make such cases far more troublesome to prosecute than drug 
smuggling cases.  However, no migrant smuggler has reason at 
this point to fear the consequences of his actions.  Until 
such consequences are vigorously applied in the U.S., the 
flow of human contraband across the Mona Passage will 
continue.  The USG rightly continues to threaten the 
Dominican Republic with Category 3 Trafficking In Persons 
status, but the absence of USG convictions for migrant 
smuggling seems to undermine that threat. 
 
13.  Negative consequences must also extend to the migrants 
themselves.  Embassy understands there are plans to place 
IDENT fingerprinting and photography systems on Coast Guard 
cutters in the Mona Passage.  Such systems could defeat the 
false identities typically offered by detained migrants and 
could provide useful information to consular sections 
receiving applications from former would-be illegals.  IDENT 
could also help identify repeat offenders and aid 
investigations and intelligence activities. 
 
14.  Embassy has the impression that interagency coordination 
in Puerto Rico to date has not resulted in maritime migrant 
smuggling convictions.  We believe that the only effective 
way to plug this hole in our homeland security is to 
implement consequences for migrant smugglers and their 
passengers in the United States.  To achieve these ends, 
Embassy offers full cooperation and all appropriate support 
within its resources. 
HERTELL 
"
"13630","1/30/2004 11:23","04SANTODOMINGO596","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 000596 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND EB 
PLEASE PASS TO USTR: S.CRONIN 
TREASURY FOR OASIS: R.TOLOUI AND L.LAMONICA 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS, EFIN, PREL, EINV, ECON, DR 
SUBJECT:  TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMPANIES UNHAPPY WITH NEW 
PRESIDENTIAL DECREE TAXING SALES REVENUES 
 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary:  Executives from three Dominican 
telecommunications companies, all with majority U.S. 
investment, briefed emboffs January 27 on a recent 
presidential decree they said effectively imposes a 10 
percent tax on telecommunications companies\' gross revenues. 
They asked for USG advocacy to repeal the tax and indicated 
they would probably appeal on constitutional grounds if the 
measure remained in effect.  All four Dominican 
telecommunications companies are majority foreign-owned -- 
the fourth being French firm Orange.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) Representatives of the three largest 
telecommunications companies in the Dominican Republic told 
emboffs on January 27 they had been informed on January 23 
of a recent presidential decree imposing a ten percent tax 
on telecommunication company revenues.  The firms are 
Codetel (Verizon), Centennial Dominicana (New Jersey-based 
Centennial Communications), and TriCom (Dominican company 
listed on NYSE; majority shares U.S.-owned).  Prior to July 
2002, telecommunications companies had been taxed on sales; 
a legal change at that time subjected them to the same tax 
procedures as other firms (1.5 percent tax on of sales, 
credited toward the eventual payment of a corporate income 
tax).  The new decree -- decided without consultation and 
issued without advice to the affected firms -- is a step 
backward to that era.  Executives noted that the sector was 
also recently hit with the temporary five percent export 
tax, even though, they argued, the net balance of their 
earnings is in pesos. 
 
3.  (SBU) The representatives asked for USG advocacy for 
repealing the decree.  They based their argument on three 
main points: 
 
a) the GODR has singled out the telecom sector because of 
the majority foreign ownership; 
 
b) the decree was issued arbitrarily and in a manner that 
was not transparent (they received a letter last week from a 
mid-level tax authority official instructing them to begin 
payments in February); and 
 
c) the new tax on gross revenues completely alters their 
business plans, imposes a significant financial burden and 
negatively impacts their investment. 
 
4.  (SBU) All indicated that they were likely to cease 
investment in the Dominican Republic, given the uncertainty 
created in business conditions, unless the tax is repealed. 
Codetel representatives said that they had referred the 
issue to legal counsel for a decision whether to refuse 
payment while appealing the measure to the Supreme Court as 
unconstitutional.  (The Court held in November that the 5 
percent tax on exports, imposed by presidential decree, was 
invalid because all revenue measures must originate in the 
legislature; in December Congress approved the 5 percent tax 
as one of several measures to comply with an IMF agreement.) 
 
5.  (SBU) Comment:  Telecom and energy are the two Dominican 
economic sectors with the most U.S. investment, and recently 
there has been little good to report about companies\' 
experiences in either sector.  Sectors with dollar earnings 
are attractive targets.  The GODR is hard pressed for 
revenue and the president\'s one-line decree derogating a 
previous measure aims at raising the government take 
immediately.  The GODR gave little consideration to the mid- 
term impact: the failure to consult and the completely 
unannounced reversion to the earlier, non-standard treatment 
warns any prospective investor that the GODR -- or at least 
the current administration -- is unpredictable at best.  If 
the firms decide to petition the Supreme Court, in the midst 
of a presidential campaign, their high profile exercise will 
feed comment in the press and in the parties. 
 
6.  Embassy has asked for documentation and will seek 
additional clarification from the GODR. 
 
7.  This report was coordinated with USFCS Santo Domingo. 
 
HERTELL 
"
"13654","1/30/2004 21:38","04SANTODOMINGO630","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","04SANTODOMINGO490","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 000630 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/30/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTIONS #19: OPENING OF THE 
PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN 
 
REF: A. (A) SANTO DOMINGO 490 
 
     B. (B) SANTO DOMINGO 537 
     C. (C) SANTO DOMINGO 414 
     D. (D) SANTO DOMINGO 355 
 
1. (C) Following is number 18 in our series on the Dominican 
elections. 
 
      OPENING OF THE DOMINICAN PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN 
 
PRD - Mejia brings it home 
 
(U) A nationwide work stoppage January 28-29 to protest 
economic conditions and President Mejia\'s policies (Refs A-B) 
has only briefly interrupted the accelerating presidential 
election campaign.  President Mejia continues with 
characteristic tenacity his drive to become the ruling PRD\'s 
candidate for re-election.  An easy victor in a party primary 
in which he was the only serious candidate (Ref C), he now 
expects to be formally nominated by a PRD \"convention of 
delegates\" on January 31.  That convention will go ahead as 
scheduled, according to former president (1982-86) Salvador 
Jorge Blanco, spokesman for the organizing committee, and the 
President\'s legal adviser Guido Gomez Mazara. 
 
(C) Four PRD dissident candidates including Vice President 
Milagros Ortiz-Bosch and Tourism Secretary Rafael \"Fello\" 
Subervi plan to boycott the convention as they did the 
primary.  Subervi criticized Jorge Blanco for \"dividing the 
PRD\" by calling the convention.  Ortiz-Bosch denied reports 
that she had dropped out of the race (Ref A) and said she 
would stay the course.  A close adviser to Subervi told us 
the convention might remove PRD president Hatuey De Camps -- 
who fiercely opposes Mejia\'s re-election bid -- and elect 
President Mejia to the job.  Subervi, the PRD secretary 
general, might also be replaced. 
 
(SBU) Mainline PRD leaders, driven mainly by President 
Mejia\'s PPH faction, pushed ahead with a controversial 
proposed change to the election law (Ref D) as a strategem to 
bring the dissidents back into the fold.  Despite public 
demonstrations against it and the PRD failure on January 15 
to get a quorum in the House of Representatives, the 
so-called \"law of the preferential presidential vote\" (aka 
\"law of slogans\" or \"ley de lemas\") looks like it\'s on its 
way to passage.   Ortiz-Bosch and Subervi, according to our 
contacts, hope the PRD convention will leave open the door to 
nominating them as additional presidential candidates in the 
event the election bill passes into law. 
 
(C) The Senate approved the draft law on the first reading, 
January 27.  Senate President Jesus Vasquez Martinez and 
Chamber of Deputies President Alfredo Pacheco have both said 
they would seek civil society opinions before final approval. 
 Both have expressed reservations about whether the bill is 
constitutional --  Pacheco (protect) told us flatly that it 
is not -- but have indicated they will let discussion go 
forward. Once the measure is passed it will go to the Supreme 
Court for constitutional review before the President will 
sign.  Experts in civil society remain opposed to it. 
President of the Central Electoral Board (JCE) Luis Arias 
predicted that the measure, if passed, would facilitate fraud 
at the polls. 
 
And In This Corner, Leonel 
 
(U) Leonel Fernandez capitalized on his front-runner 
position, leading a \"march\" through low income neighborhoods 
of Santo Domingo on January 26.  Thousands of participants 
filled streets along the route with bright purple PLD flags 
and pictures of the candidate, in a timely pre-carnival 
atmosphere. Leonel grabbed headlines by accusing President 
Mejia of trying to ram through the electoral law revision to 
enable his own re-election and establish a \"dictatorship\" -- 
a hot-button reference to the country\'s long history of 
leaders who changed the election rules to keep themselves in 
power.  Fernandez supported the upcoming two-day national 
work stoppage \"against the government that has so mistreated 
the people,\" and urged protesters to be peaceful.  He 
hammered away at his campaign theme:  \"Because of the 
irresponsibility and ineptitude of the present 
government,...the Dominican Republic is in the worst crisis 
in its history.\" 
 
(C) A political adviser to Mejia told us police reports 
estimated the number of marchers at 40,000 - 60,000, judging 
from the number of buses that brought them into the city. 
According to the adviser, the President downplayed the event, 
commenting that if those were all the PLD followers Leonel 
could mobilize by paying \"millions\" for their transportation, 
food, lodging, and rum, then Hipolito and the mass-membership 
PRD could beat them handily. 
 
Elections Board Formally Invites Observers 
 
(U) Meanwhile, on January 29 the Central Electoral Board 
(JCE) announced that it had invited the UN, the OAS, IFES, 
NDI, CAPEL and regional organizations of election commissions 
to observe the presidential election process, beginning well 
in advance of May 16 if they desired.  The announcement had 
been long expected.  The timing of it did little to bolster 
the public\'s weak confidence in the impartiality of a JCE 
that is widely viewed as packed with judges from the ruling 
PRD. 
 
(SBU) NOTE: The Ley de Lemas: The proposal would allow up to 
five presidential candidates from the same party to compete 
in the general election on May 16; if no candidate wins an 
absolute majority, then the leading candidates of the two 
most-voted parties would enter a second round 45 days later. 
In our opinion this disposition is contrary to Article 90 of 
the Constitution, which stipulates that President and Vice 
President are elected by direct vote. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Bainbridge Cowell. 
HERTELL 
"
"13677","2/2/2004 22:19","04SANTODOMINGO668","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO630","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 000668 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTIONS #20: HURRAH FOR HIPOLITO 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 0630 
 
1. (SBU) Following is no. 20 in our Dominican presidential 
election series: 
 
      HURRAH FOR HIPOLITO, THE PRD CANDIDATE 
 
As exprected, President Hipolito Mejia was acclaimed as the 
PRD\'s presidential candidate by thousands of delegates and 
government employees reportedly bused in at the party\'s 
official \"Twentieth Extraordinary Assembly\" on January 31. 
None of the other PRD presidential contenders participated. 
Chaired by former president (1982-86) Salvador Jorge Blanco, 
the assembly removed outspoken anti-reelectionist PRD party 
president Hatuey De Camps and replaced him with Director 
General of Customs Vicente Sanchez Baret, a Mejia loyalist, 
until November, when a permanent official would normally be 
chosen.  Tourism Minister Rafael \"Fello\" Subervi, although 
absent from the assembly, was allowed to retain his post as 
PRD secretary general.  No vice presidential candidate was 
announced, so some speculate \"Fello\" is in the running. (He 
denies it.) 
 
The latest advance in the President\'s determined drive for 
re-election drew fire from various quarters.  Cardinal 
Archbishop Nicolas de Jesus Lopez Rodriguez admonished the 
public at a Youth Day mass the same day that \"Mejia\'s 
re-election bid in no way benefits the Dominican people and 
is going to weigh heavily on the President, his family, and 
the country.\" 
 
Mejia\'s main opponents in the PRD were acerbic.  Subervi said 
that the assembly\'s decision would make permanent the split 
in the party, and Vice President Milagros Ortiz-Bosch in a 
long, eloquent written apologia in local papers lamented the 
\"high cost I have paid.\"  Ousted party president De Camps 
declared the assembly \"a farce\" and threatened to challenge 
its legality before the Supreme Court.  At the opening 
baseball game of the four-nation Caribbean Series on February 
1, the capacity crowd in Quisqueya Stadium could be heard on 
television booing President Mejia as he tossed the first 
pitch. 
 
Meanwhile, Mejia\'s PPH faction continued to push the \"law of 
slogans\" electoral law revision through Congress -- the next 
maneuver in his strategy to ensure that he gets to the second 
round of the elections to confront current front runner 
Leonel Fernandez (PLD).  Following the first favorable Senate 
vote January 29, a committee of senators was set to meet with 
the Central Election Board (JCE) on February 2 to gather 
information on the practical difficulties of implementing 
such a legal change so close to the May 16 first round. 
Mejia\'s steamroller should get final approval by the 
PRD/PPH\'s crushing majority in the Senate, but will encounter 
rougher terrain in the Chamber of Deputies, where the PRD has 
less than a majority.  JCE Elections Director Gilberto Cruz 
Erasme told us February 2 that the bill, if passed, would be 
\"extremely disruptive\" to preparations for the election, 
which at present are on track and on schedule.  A cabinet 
member confirmed to the Ambassador and DCM on February 2 that 
Mejia would submit the law, if passed, to the Supreme Court 
for a call on its constitutionality. 
 
The PRD delegates\' assembly is aimed at giving the President 
his first boost and his initial momentum.  But the road is a 
long and steep one.  Mejia will be counting on the PRD\'s 
structure as a party of the masses to get this campaign goin 
"
"13709","2/3/2004 20:47","04SANTODOMINGO683","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","02STATE3705","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 000683 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), L/LEI (FUENTES AND TAYLOR) 
JUSTICE FOR CRIM/OIA (J.MAZUREK AND R. GOLDMAN) 
US MARSHAL SERVICE PLEASE PASS TO C. DUDLEY 
DEA FOR OF,OFI,DO,DOC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/01/2014 
TAGS: CJAN, KCRM, KFRD, PINR, SNAR, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ATTORNEY GENERAL FINALLY COMPLIES, 
EXTRADITES JOESFINA ROJAS 
 
REF: A. 02 STATE 03705 
 
     B. EMAILS KERWIN/HEINEMANN/MAZUREK - NOVEMBER 03 
 
Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Lisa J. Kubiske.  Reason 1.5 (b) 
(d). 
 
1. (U) On January 30, 2004, Josefina Rojas was extradited 
from the Dominican Republic in the company of US Marshals. 
Rojas is wanted to stand trial on federal narcotics charges 
in the Southern District of New York.  The Dominican 
Republic\'s National Drug Control Directorate (DNCD), working 
with U.S. Marshals and DEA, arrested Rojas.  This is the 70th 
extradition since 1998, and is the first case of a prisoner 
released by the GODR Attorney General and then re-arrested 
and extradited. 
 
2. (SBU) Embassy requested the extradition of Rojas in 
January 2002.  The provisional arrest warrant for her was 
issued by former Dominican Attorney General, Virgilio Bello 
Rosa, on October 25, 2002.  Rojas was captured and imprisoned 
in Spring 2003.  President Mejia signed an order of 
extradition for Rojas on October 29, 2003.  One day later, 
current Attorney General, Victor Cespedes Martinez, signed an 
order releasing Rojas from custody.  Dominican law 
enforcement contacts told DEA agents that Rojas had been 
released.  Embassy officials received no official notice or 
explanation of the release.  Additionally, the extradition 
order signed by President Mejia did not become public until 
Rojas was re-arrested on January 25, 2004. 
 
3. (C) In a November meeting with Ambassador Hertell, 
Attorney General Cespedes stated that he believed that Rojas 
was released because he felt that she would be subject to 
double jeopardy if returned to the United States.  When 
questioned further, the Attorney General stated that Rojas 
was released from prison due to illness and for reasons of 
compassion.  The Attorney General said that she had a tumor 
that needed to be treated and that she would be turned over 
to the USG after she received treatment.  Ambassador Hertell 
told the Attorney General that Rojas would be provided 
whatever medical treatment necessary once she was in custody 
of U.S. authorities. 
 
4. (C) The Dominican law enforcement contacts who originally 
alerted the DEA of Rojas\' release speculated that Cespedes 
freed her was because a personal relationship had developed 
between Rojas and the Attorney General.  After Rojas was 
released, Dominican law enforcement contacts reported to DEA 
agents that she returned to the prison where she had been 
incarcerated to taunt other prisoners. 
 
5. (C) In addition to meeting with Attorney General Cespedes 
to discuss extradition cases Ambassador Hertell has raised 
extradition issues with President Mejia on at least four 
occasions within the past three months.  It is likely that 
the direct dialog between Ambassador Hertell and President 
Mejia precipitated the re-arrest of Rojas and her subsequent 
extradition. 
 
6. (SBU) Since the GODR began extraditing fugitives to the 
U.S. in 1998, 70 prisoners have been successfully returned to 
the U.S. to stand trial or serve outstanding sentences. 
Since early 2003, when Cespedes was named Attorney General, 
five fugitives for whom the USG has requested extradition 
have been arrested and released.  Prior to Cespedes becoming 
Attorney General, no fugitives who had been arrested pursuant 
to a valid U.S. requests for extradition had been released by 
the GODR.  The Rojas case marks the first instance in which a 
prisoner had been released by order of the Attorney General 
and subsequently re-arrested and extradited. 
 
7. (C) The actions of Attorney General Cespedes in relation 
to Rojas are questionable at best, illegal at worst.  With 
the circulation of President Mejia\'s October 29 extradition 
order for Rojas, it is now evident that the Attorney General 
contravened a direct written order by the President when he 
signed the order for her release.  The Attorney General\'s 
conduct in other extradition cases is being reviewed and 
questioned by embassy officials.  Septel will report updates 
on those cases. 
 
8. (U) Rojas marks the first extradition by the Dominican 
Republic in 2004, and the fifty-third under the 
administration of President Mejia. 
HERTELL 
"
"13719","2/4/2004 11:00","04SANTODOMINGO685","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 000685 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/CAR AND EB/ESC; 
TREASURY FOR DO: NLEE, RTOLOUI,LLAMONICA; 
DEPT PASS TO USTR/S.CRONIN; DEPT PASS TO AID/LAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BTIO, ENRG, EINV, ECON, DR 
SUBJECT: AES DOMINICANA TO SELL OFF ELECTRICITY 
DISTRIBUTION OPERATIONS 
 
1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  AES Dominicana President Julian Nebreda 
and local generating facilities President Kevin Manning 
told DCM and Emboffs on February 3 that Virginia-based AES 
intends 
to sell its 50 percent share of Dominican distribution 
company EdeEste, 
which AES manages.  Nebreda cited monthly losses of $10 
million 
and the bleak outlook for the Dominican electrical sector as 
the 
main reasons.  AES will keep its investment in generating 
facilities 
and will remain the largest energy sector investor in the 
Dominican 
Republic.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (SBU)  AES Dominicana President Julian Nebreda and local 
generating 
facilities manager Kevin Manning called on the DCM and 
emboffs on 
February 3 to advise that AES will announce on February 6 
the company\'s plans to sell its 50 percent ownership of 
EdeEste, the 
power distribution company which serves the East of the 
country.  Its 
U.S.-based parent company has made the firm decision and is 
writing 
off the investment entirely in its 2003 accounts.   Nebreda 
said 
the company has already contacted potential buyers.  AES 
would like 
to sell to a firm that would agree to a award a management 
contract to AES. 
 
3.  (U) EdeEste, along with the other two electricity 
distribution 
companies, was partially privatized in the late 1990s under 
the 
Fernandez administration.  Spanish-based Union Fenosa bought 
fifty 
percent of EdeSur and EdeNorte; AES bought the same 
percentage of 
EdeEste.  The government maintained half ownership in each. 
Last September 
the GODR repurchase of Union Fenosa\'s shares led to 
suspension of the 
International Monetary Fund Standby Agreement that had been 
signed in 
August. 
 
4.  (SBU)  AES officials said Edeste is losing about $10 
million a 
month and that in the present circumstances there are no 
prospects for 
the sector improving in the short term.  Nebreda noted that 
consumer 
collections were at about 90 percent of billing, but if GODR 
nonpayment 
is included, the percentage drops to about 83.  He said that 
does 
not take into account arrears in subsidy payments, unpaid 
since October.  Both Manning and Nebreda expected that 
consumer 
collections would drop further, noting the continuing peso 
depreciaiton 
and that many customers do not pay when there are frequent 
blackouts. 
 
5.  (SBU) Nebreda and Manning predicted that the GODR would 
intensify 
its negative campaign against the company after its February 
6 
announcement.  Manning cited January 25 remarks by Finance 
Minister Calderon 
on television disputing the government\'s debt to AES and 
claiming the 
company actually owed money to the GODR.  They said that the 
sale 
will make moot a recent GODR decree requiring the company to 
divest 
shares in one of the generating companies within the next 60 
days. 
The decree, initially issued last fall, stated that AES was 
in violation 
of the Dominican Electricity Law, which limits the amount of 
generating 
capacity that an entity could own if it also had ownership of 
distribution. 
 
COMMENT 
 
6.  (SBU)   AES is widely respected as an effective operator 
and an 
important voice for the electricity sector.  The company has 
led efforts 
to reform the sector. Its decision to withdraw comes as a 
GODR committee is 
studying requirements to re-privatize the other two 
distribution companies, with 
a mandate from President Mejia to propose sale of up to 75 
percent of shares. 
The AES move will be highly dissuasive to that effort and 
will hand the 
Mejia administration a vote of no confidence from the private 
sector. 
The Mejia administration is likely to continue its rhetoric 
of recrimination 
against generators and against distributors -- assuming that 
any private 
operator is willing to take over AES shares, the last 
remaining private 
sector ownership in the bad business of electricity 
distribution in the 
Dominican Republic. 
 
7. (SBU) When Union Fenosa got out last September, the GODR 
plunged into 
a debt-financed buyback, blowing up its new IMF standby in 
the process. 
The renewal of the standby is expected, finally, for next 
week. Given the 
very different operating styles of Union Fenosa and AES as 
well as the 
administration\'s long investment of effort in meeting IMF 
conditionalities, 
we do not -- repeat not -- predict a repeat performance. 
HERTELL 
"
"13753","2/5/2004 15:13","04SANTODOMINGO745","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","03SANTODOMINGO6671","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 000745 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/OMA; NSC FOR SHANNON; 
TREASURY FOR DO - N LEE, R TOLOUI, L LAMONICA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/30/2014 
TAGS: DR, EFIN, KJUS, PGOV, PREL 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN BANKING SERIES #4: BANCREDITO AND 
BANINTER MANEUVERS 
 
REF: A. A) 03 SANTO DOMINGO 06671 
 
     B. B) 03 SANTO DOMINGO 06857 
     C. C) 03 SANTO DOMINGO 07566 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa B. Kubiske, Reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1.  This is the fourth cable in a series on the Dominican 
Banking Sector. 
 
BANCREDITO AND BANINTER MANEUVERS 
 
(U) Baninter and Bancredito are no more.  Baninter has been 
dissolved and Bancredito has been sold to Grupo Leon and 
renamed Banco Leon.  Although the legal entities no longer 
exist, the legacies of their failures continue to plague 
Dominican citizens.  The debt incurred by the Central Bank in 
guaranteeing accounts and loans at the banks is a major 
factor in the current economic crisis.  In addition, the 
conduct of the cases has done little to rebuild -- or 
establish -- confidence in Dominican administration of 
justice.  However, not all avenues have been exhausted. 
 
BANCREDITO - District Attorney won\'t prosecute, so the 
Central Bank finds another route 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
(U) District Attorney Maximo Aristy Caraballo announced on 
January 28 that he will not pursue criminal prosecutions in 
the Bancredito case, since \"the alleged fraud is a matter for 
the civil courts.\"  He thereby declined to entertain the 
complaint lodged with him in November by the Central Bank 
legal team.  Within 24 hours Central Bank attorneys took 
advantage of a procedural mechanism to file their criminal 
complaint directly with the administrator of courts.  The 
administrator has assigned the case to a judge of 
instruction, charged to assemble evidence and review charges 
to determine if there is sufficient grounds for a full 
criminal trial.  If so, a second judge (or judiciary panel) 
will be assigned to hear the case. 
 
(C) This unusual procedural posture became the Central Bank\'s 
only recourse to pursue a criminal case after the District 
Attorney\'s refusal to bring charges.  As reported in November 
in our Banking Series #2, the District Attorney issued arrest 
warrants for Bancredito officials Arturo Pellerano and his 
vice president Mendoza but withdrew them on the next working 
day at the instructions of President Mejia and Attorney 
General Victor Cespedes.  At the time, the President, 
Attorney General and District Attorney all said they would 
study the evidence and charges, so the case was not being 
dropped.  They took their time.  During the December holidays 
Mejia told a Central Bank attorney the case would move 
forward by January 3rd.  Nothing happened until the District 
Attorney\'s disappointing announcement at the end of the month. 
 
(U) The press put a spotlight on the District Attorney\'s 
decision not to prosecute.  The Central Bank legal team 
countered the coverage with a scathing ad in the dailies, 
scolding Aristy for failing to consult or study the evidence: 
\"The decision of the prosecutor has opened a new avenue for 
the \'powerful\' of our country to enjoy impunity.\"  All four 
attorneys signed the letter with its declaration that they 
refused to stand by and let case go unprosecuted. 
 
(SBU) Bancredito president Pellerano has been in the United 
States since shortly after the Central Bank first filed its 
case in November.  He is attending to the gravely ill 
patriarch of the Pellerano clan.  The Pelleranos have been 
hard hit by the bankruptcy of TRICOM, their Dominican-based 
multinational telecoms operator, listed on the New York stock 
exchange but currently in restructuring with accord of 
bondholders.  Their minority share holdings are worth just 
about zero and they have had no management oversight for some 
time.   Pellerano may be attending to other family business, 
taking advantage of his liberty to shield other assets. 
 
BANINTER - Judge challenged, case stalled 
----------------------------------------- 
 
(C) At a time when banking frauds have ignited inflation and 
peso devaluation for the presidential campaign, the District 
Attorney\'s decision not to prosecute on Bancredito combines 
uneasily with last Christmas Eve\'s release of Baninter 
accused Ramon Baez and Marcos Baez Cocco.  The investigation 
against them is currently suspended, due to a defense 
petition to the Supreme Court asserting that investigating 
Judge Eduardo Sanchez Ortiz is biased.  Last week the 
Attorney General filed a brief opposing the removal of Judge 
Sanchez.  Until the Supreme Court examines the petition, 
Judge Sanchez\'s hands are tied.  He cannot even file for his 
sixth extension of the time allotted for investigation of 
this complex and highly political case. The Baez defense team 
moved its petition into the public spotlight on February 4, 
when it placed full page ads in local dailies with Judge 
Sanchez\'s photo and a listing of the defense position on why 
Judge Sanchez should be removed from the case. 
 
(C) Dominican expectations of mishandled justice may yet be 
proven wrong.  For one thing, President Mejia has told us, 
privately, that he will prosecute all those responsible.  For 
another, the press is on the scent.  In its lead editorial of 
January 30, Listin Diario highlighted an AP report that \"put 
its finger directly on the wound in a single paragraph, and 
we quote, \'The Dominican Republic went to the IMF when the 
deterioration of its economy was aggravated by a fraud 
totaling USD 2 billion in one of the most important banks in 
the country!\"  The Central Bank team is tenacious and ready 
to go public, while overt meddling by administration 
officials is unlikely, especially during a difficult 
presidential campaign.  Hope rests in the last instance, 
however, on the judicial system and its relatively unproven 
ability in these circumstances to resist pressure and bribery. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Angela Kerwin and Michael Meigs. 
HERTELL 
"
"13789","2/6/2004 21:34","04SANTODOMINGO790","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE333935","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 000790 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, ELAB, KDEM, KPAO, KSEP, PGOV, PHUM, PREL 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: SUPPORTING HUMAN RIGHTS AND 
DEMOCRACY 
 
REF: SECSTATE 333935 
 
1. The following is the Embassy response to reftel. 
 
Human Rights Record in the DR and the US Strategy 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
2. President Hipolito Mejia of the Dominican Revolutionary 
Party (PRD) took office in August 2000 after a generally free 
and fair election.  Although there were some improvements in 
a few areas, the Government,s human rights record was poor 
and serious problems remained.  Weak Dominican public 
institutions at times failed to protect fundamental human 
rights and enforce the rule of law, undermining democratic 
consolidation in the Dominican Republic.  Expeditious trials 
were problematic due to cumbersome judicial procedures and 
understaffed, under-funded and under-motivated justice system 
institutions including the judiciary, Public Ministry, 
investigative police and public defenders.  Police continued 
to use excessive force, and unlawful killings increased. 
Domestic violence was a growing problem.  Worsening economic 
conditions, in part due to the collapse of one of the 
country,s largest commercial banks, contributed to societal 
anxiety and speculation that the 2004 presidential elections 
might be conducted in a biased or fraudulent manner.  To 
address these concerns, the 2003-2004 U.S. human rights and 
democracy strategy for the Dominican Republic encouraged free 
and fair presidential elections, promoted respect for human 
rights, fostered more internally democratic political 
parties, promoted police reform, addressed child labor 
problems, built respect for internationally recognized labor 
standards, combated trafficking in persons, developed a 
career civil service, and supported judicial reforms and the 
rule of law. 
 
3. U.S. officials routinely highlighted human rights concerns 
in public speeches.  On various occasions throughout the 
year, Ambassador Hertell stressed the importance of  human 
rights in public and private fora.  Assistant Secretary of 
State for Western Hemisphere Affairs Ambassador Roger 
Noriega, in an address to the Dominican Congress in December 
2003, outlined U.S. policy concerns including human rights, 
the rule of law, trafficking in persons, building democratic 
institutions and the need for transparent elections.  The 
U.S. Trade Representative and the Assistant Attorney General 
for Civil Rights also raised these priorities in meetings 
with Dominican Government officials during their visits to 
the Dominican Republic. 
 
U.S. Efforts to Strengthen Police and Military 
Respect for Human Rights 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
4. The U.S. engaged the Government of the Dominican Republic 
(GODR) on methods to reduce extra-judicial killings, torture 
and unwarranted violence by members of the National Police. 
A Human Rights and Democracy Fund (HRDF) grant awarded in 
September 2003 will allow for the creation of Police Abuse 
Reporting Centers in 2004.  Through U.S. assistance to human 
rights NGOs and the National Police Institute of Human 
Dignity, citizens will be able to submit complaints of police 
abuse to three reporting centers.  The reporting centers will 
create an information system to register and channel 
complaints, and a separate database to profile human rights 
abuses for research purposes.  This system will streamline 
National Police efforts to focus on problem areas and reduce 
abuse by officers.  As a result of this project, human rights 
violations committed by police will be reduced and more 
police officers will be sanctioned. 
 
5. The mission invested more than $500,000 in U.S. Government 
funding for the National Police to develop a new curriculum 
at the Police Academies for recruits and for future officers. 
 The revised police curriculum includes training on police 
methods analogous to U.S. standards.  In compliance with the 
Leahy Amendment, the Military Assistance and Advisory Group 
worked closely with the Armed Forces to vet military units 
for U.S. training and checked candidates with other Embassy 
offices. 
 
U.S. Promotes the Rule of Law and Democracy 
------------------------------------------- 
 
6. The U.S. promoted the rule of law in the Dominican 
Republic by supporting implementation of judicial reforms. 
U.S. technical assistance supported a survey of the cost of 
implementing the 2002 Criminal Procedures Code, which will be 
fully effective in September 2004.  With our help, in 
November 2003 the Supreme Court of Justice issued several 
resolutions requiring the National Police to obtain an arrest 
warrant from a competent judicial authority before arresting 
or detaining a suspect, except for persons caught in the act 
of committing a crime.  Also in November, the Attorney 
General,s office issued a resolution requiring that a 
defendant have counsel at all phases of criminal proceedings 
and that police and prosecutors read a &Miranda warning8 
informing defendants of their rights upon arrest. 
 
7. U.S. technical assistance and training also strengthened 
the efficiency and effectiveness of the judicial system. 
With U.S. help to create a public defense program, the GODR 
appointed 14 public defenders and 2 investigators and 
processed 1,052 cases in 2003 -- a tremendous accomplishment 
in an ongoing effort to reduce the backlog of pending cases. 
The U.S. provided technical assistance to the Prosecutorial 
School and for the development of a Public Ministry Career 
Statute.  The statute, published in July 2003, established a 
professional mechanism of selecting attorneys appointed 
through a civil service system. 
 
8. In May and September 2003, the U.S. provided training on 
prosecuting money-laundering cases.  Funding from the U.S. 
Department of Justice Office of Overseas Prosecutorial 
Development Assistance Training (OPDAT) provided training for 
60 Dominican judges, prosecutors and law enforcement officers. 
 
U.S. Engages Civil Society and Promotes Clean Elections 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
9. In order to encourage participatory democratic practices 
within political parties, the U.S. sponsored Dominican 
participation in civic education and exchange programs in the 
U.S.  In February and March 2003, USAID in partnership with 
the National Democratic Institute (NDI) funded five young 
community activists who attended a seminar in Washington on 
political party leadership.  Upon their return to the 
Dominican Republic, the participants implemented local 
projects to bolster democratic processes within their 
respective parties.  The U.S. also funded a program to 
promote women,s participation in politics.  The program 
focused on methods to foster women as voters and as 
candidates for office. 
 
10. The Embassy had a strong interest in promoting democracy, 
particularly in view of the upcoming 2004 presidential 
election.  The United States is seeking to fund international 
election observers through the Organization of American 
States (OAS) to improve transparent, fair elections.  Through 
U.S. assistance to NGO partners, 6,000 Dominican volunteers 
were also selected and trained to observe the May 2004 
elections. 
 
U.S. Efforts to Combat Domestic Violence and Child Labor 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
11. To address the reported upsurge in domestic violence, the 
U.S. sponsored a project to prevent domestic and gender-based 
violence in the Dominican Republic.  USAID provided technical 
assistance to help raise public awareness about the issue. 
Once fully implemented, the project will assist the Women,s 
Secretariat to develop guidelines for accreditation and 
 
SIPDIS 
regulation of model women,s shelters.  The U.S. also 
sponsored training in the United States for Dominican women 
with disabilities. 
 
12. Throughout the year the United States continued to 
encourage strong government support for efforts to eliminate 
child labor, dedicating more than $3 million over a five-year 
period to multi-year programs.  The U.S. Department of 
Labor--funded project targeted the worst forms of child labor 
in the sex industry, tomato producing provinces, coffee 
growing areas and hazardous agriculture provinces.  U.S. 
funding for these programs also included an educational 
component to sensitize parents and school-age children to the 
physical and sociological risks of child labor and to promote 
school attendance.  As a result of our assistance, in 
September the Ministry of Labor declared one of the USDOL 
targeted areas as one \"free of child labor.\" 
 
U.S. Launches Robust Campaign against Trafficking in Persons 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
13. The U.S. engaged the GODR in a robust campaign to combat 
trafficking in persons.  USAID funded an NGO partner to help 
draft comprehensive anti-trafficking legislation, which was 
passed by the Dominican Congress in July and signed into law 
by the President in August 2003.  In addition, USAID missions 
in the Dominican Republic and Haiti received a grant to study 
the problem of Haitian children trafficked to the Dominican 
Republic.  The U.S. Government also provided technical 
support to a newly created trafficking unit at the National 
Police.  At the Embassy,s urging, a trafficking unit was 
also created at the Attorney General,s office. 
Additionally, the United States funded several training 
courses for members of the National Police, prosecutors and 
judges on implementing the new law against trafficking in 
persons.  In September 2003 a grant was approved to develop a 
curriculum at the USAID-supported Judicial School to improve 
processing of trafficking in persons cases.  The U.S. 
continued to meet with key officials to encourage prosecution 
of traffickers. 
 
Addendum: 
The following are USG funded democracy and human rights 
programs for $100,000 or more: 
 
USAID - Electoral Assistance: $1,350,000 
USAID - Democratization of Political Parties: $500,000 
USAID - Strengthening the Justice System: $2,250,000 
USAID - Anti-corruption Programs: $1,100,000 
USAID - Institution Building/Civil Society: $267,000 
USAID - TIP Joint Project DR/Haiti: $62,000 
NAS - Police Academies Curricula: $500,000 
NAS - TIP Curriculum for Judicial School: $108,000 
HERTELL 
"
"13790","2/6/2004 22:16","04SANTODOMINGO794","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","04SANTODOMINGO537","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 000794 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, DRL, AND CA 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/05/2009 
TAGS: PGOV, ELAB, ASEC, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN WORK STOPPAGE, JAN 28-29: FEW GAINS 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 537 
 
Classified By: Economic & Political Counselor Michael Meigs.  Reason: 1 
.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: The Dominican Republic has returned to 
normal after a January 28-29 national work stoppage by labor 
and community groups and small leftist parties.  The stoppage 
was successful for the opposition in gaining widespread 
Dominican support and successful for the government in that 
violence was limited to eight dead in only scattered, 
isolated confrontations.  Many were arrested before or during 
the stoppage and detained for its duration; most have been 
released.  Some human rights abuses occurred.  The message is 
that Dominicans are glumly unhappy about deteriorating 
economic conditions.  The rising tempo of presidential 
election campaign activities should distract discontented 
citizens and encourage them to make their opinions known via 
the ballot box.  End summary. 
 
2. (SBU) Productive activity and traffic returned to normal 
in the Dominican Republic January 30 after a two-day national 
work stoppage, in which most businesses and offices closed as 
most employees and customers stayed home.  The ad hoc 
\"Coordination of Popular, Labor, and Transport Worker 
Organizations\" declared the \"huelga\" a success in marking 
discontent with depressed economic conditions and the 
government\'s policies. The small panel of spokespersons told 
the media they would maintain a set of (unrealistic) demands, 
such as the immediate doubling of salaries.   President Mejia 
commented,\"We all lose\" from such actions, especially the 
neediest, because of the lost earnings. 
 
Confrontations 
- - - - - - - 
 
3. (SBU) The empty streets spoke more about citizen 
discontent than about organized resistance.  No marches or 
organized demonstrations occurred (in contrast to the 
enthusiastic parades on January 26 for the PLD and late 
January 27 for the victory of Santo DOmingo\'s baseball team 
Licey in the national series.)  In sporadic, uncoordinated 
actions in low-income neighborhoods of the capital and in 
towns in the eastern half of the country protestors burned 
tires, threw rocks, broke windows and set off homemade 
explosives.  Shots were fired.  The scattered violence 
petered out by the afternoon of January 30.  When heavily 
armed patrols of military personnel and police responded to 
protests, violent confrontations left casualties.  The 
National Police tell us 8 persons were killed (including one 
policeman) and 212 wounded.  Military intelligence say some 
shooting was provoked by local drug traffickers.  A National 
Police tally on January 30 included a breakdown of casualties 
by location: 6 dead (3 in the north, 2 in the southeast, and 
1 in the capital) and 43 injured (33 in the north, 5 in the 
capital, 4 in the southwest, and 1 in the southeast).  By 
comparison, the one-day national work stoppage on November 11 
left 8 dead. 
 
Arrests 
- - - - 
 
4. (C) Police reported that 325 persons had been detained 
during the two-day stoppage, mostly protesters involved in or 
on the margins of civil disturbances.   Military intelligence 
say some \"huelga\" organizers had been rounded up for 
questioning, but said they had all been released January 29 
and claimed the arrests had been carried out with a judicial 
warrant.  The military acknowledged that some human rights 
had been infringed, but provided no details.  President Mejia 
told the Ambassador on February 5 that 1500 arrests had been 
made in order to forestall violence.  According to the 
police, all the detainees but 7 had been released as of 
February 5, and it was possible the 7 might be released 
February 6. 
 
Human Rights Abuses 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
5. (SBU) The spouse of labor leader Ramon Perez Figuereo, an 
organizer of the \"huelga,\" said on local television January 
28 that police had searched her house and sought to detain 
her husband without a warrant -- a practice forbidden under 
reformed procedural guidelines adopted by the justice system 
in 2003.    Embassy staff report that in some cases police 
disregarded the constitutional right to the inviolability of 
the home unless judicial formalities have been complied with, 
the right to freedom of circulation, and the legal 
requirement for arrest warrants. 
 
Organizers\' Demands 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
6. (SBU) The political message was that many Dominicans are 
fed up with the current economic problems and government. 
Most people just stayed home from work.  Opposition 
politicians, church leaders, and some mainline business 
organizations and labor unions expressed sympathy or support 
for the work stoppage, but there were no organized 
demonstrations to air grievances or advocate policy changes. 
Some \"huelga\" organizers individually put forward radical 
demands of their own without gathering any mainline support. 
Among their calls were that the Dominican Republic not sign 
its pending IMF agreement or a free trade agreement with the 
United States; that prices of basic necessities and the 
dollar exchange rate be reduced by fiat; that wages be 
doubled; and that President Mejia resign. 
 
7. (SBU) The government and media commentators dismissed such 
demands and President Mejia rejected the demands as 
\"blackmail.\"  The only group that might gain something is 
health workers, who staged a one-day advance strike at public 
hospitals January 27 demanding higher salaries and more 
equipment and supplies.  President Mejia agreed that a health 
workers\' advocacy group could form a committee to suggest 
legislation to finance higher levels of health spending. 
 
Participating Groups 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
8. (SBU)  The umbrella \"Coordination Council\" member 
organizations included the relatively obscure \"Collective of 
Popular Organizations,\" \"Council of Popular Unity,\" 
\"Coordinator for Unity and Struggle,\" and \"Broad Front of 
Popular Struggle\" (FALPO) led by Fidel Santana, \"Committee 
for Defense of Barrio Rights,\" \"National Coordinator of 
Peasant Women,\" and the National Confederation of Unified 
Transport Workers (CNTU) led by Ramon Perez Figuereo.  There 
were small leftist parties including the \"Force of the 
Revolution\" of Narciso Isa Conde, \"New Alternative\" of Ramon 
Almanzar, the Independent Movement for Unity and Change 
(MIUCA) of Virtudes Alvarez, the Communist Labor Party (PCT) 
of Manuel Salazar, the Patriotic Union (UPA) of Hector 
Sanchez, the Party of Dominican Workers (PTD) of Ivan 
Rodriguez, and the Force of Labor (Fuerza del Trabajo) of 
Jose Adon.  And there were community groups such as the 
\"Committee of Popular Action of Capotillo,\" a low-income 
barrio in Santo Domingo; the Dominican Association of 
Teachers; and student and youth groups. 
 
Economic Cost 
- - - - - - - 
 
9. (SBU) Economic losses from the work stoppage are difficult 
to estimate, but were probably significant for a country that 
was already in an economic slump and serious financial 
difficulty.  The night before, President Mejia told the 
nation on television that lost production would total RD 3 
billion (about 60 million dollars).  No one publicly 
challenged that figure. 
 
More Work Stoppages? 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
10. (SBU) This action, like the November one, was carefully 
timed for a week including a national holiday (Monday was the 
national celebration of independence figure Duarte).  The 
\"huelga\" organizers announced follow-up meetings of the 
groups that supported the \"huelga,\" on February 7, 15, and 
26, to assess results and discuss future protests.  A 
military intelligence contact expects future actions to vent 
discontent with the economic situation. 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
11. (SBU) One success, whether due to popular indifference or 
to actions of the security forces, was the limitation of 
violence.  Dominican history has included far worse episodes, 
particularly in the 1990s.  Perhaps the principal cost was 
the marked further deterioration of the country\'s image 
abroad.  In newspapers across the United States and in 
Europe, press accounts of deaths and wire service photos of 
armed police in action provided a handy lead for stories on 
economic problems, downgrades by the credit rating firms, and 
the noisy partisan disarray of the presidential election 
campaign. The tourism sector has so far been largely immune. 
However, the leading hotel development group now markets its 
destination as \"Punta Cana\" without mention of \"the Dominican 
Republic.\" 
 
12. (SBU) The rising tempo of election campaign activities, 
driven by intense local political loyalties, will provide 
alternative opportunities for Dominicans to channel their 
frustrations and push for solutions via the ballot box. The 
coalition of strike organizers may put another stoppage on 
the calendar, but if so, it is likely to be overshadowed by 
the campaigns. 
HERTELL 
"
"13809","2/9/2004 11:21","04SANTODOMINGO796","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 000796 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (SMITH AND MCISAAC) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PTER, AORC, CO, DR 
SUBJECT: GODR VOTES WITH US ON OAS COLOMBIA PEACE PROCESS 
RESOLUTION 
 
REF: TELCON AND FAX SMITH/PIERCE 02-06-04 
 
 1.  Poloffs delivered urgent request for GODR to vote for a 
resolution to establish an OAS mission to support the peace 
process in Colombia.  Ambassador Rhadys Abreu de Polanco, 
deputy director of the International Organizations desk at 
the GODR Foreign Ministry, discussed the resolution with 
Deputy Foreign Minister Miguel Picardo and informed poloff 
that the GODR would instruct its OAS permanent representative 
to vote for the resolution. 
HERTELL 
"
"13811","2/9/2004 11:30","04SANTODOMINGO797","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 000797 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/CAR AND EB/ESC; 
TREASURY FOR DO: NLEE, RTOLOUI, LLAMONICA; 
DEPT. PASS TO USTR/S.CRONIN; DEPT. PASS TO AID/LAC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/05/2014 
TAGS: ENRG, ECON, EINV, DR 
SUBJECT: GODR COMMISSION TO INVESTIGATE ENERGY GENERATORS 
RAISES CONCERNS ABOUT POSSIBLE MILITARY INTERVENTION IN 
ELECTRICITY SECTOR 
 
 
Classified By: DEPUTY CHIEF OF MISION LISA J. KUBISKE; 
REASON 1.5 (B & D) 
 
 1.  (C) SUMMARY:  The GODR appointed a six-member commission 
that includes Police General Pedro de Jesus Candelier and 
Secretary of Defense, Lieutenant General Jose Miguel Soto 
 
SIPDIS 
Jimenez, and senior GODR officials to reconcile GODR debt, 
determine fuel company fuel stocks, and review a sector 
study.  In meetings with Emboffs, GODR officials emphasized 
that there is no intent on the part of the government to 
intervene in the troubled sector. Companies fear that the 
commission is intended to intimidate and will be a step 
toward military intervention in their operations.  A local 
representative of the World Bank reported that members of the 
Bank\'s board and IMF representatives with whom he had spoken 
were concerned that the announcement of the commission could 
make IFI disbursements more difficult.  Ambassador Hertell, 
in a February 6 telephone conversation, told Dominican 
Ambassador to Washington Hugo Guiliani, that the creation of 
the commission was misguided and sent the international 
community the wrong message.  GODR-company talks continue. 
Finance Minister Rafael Calderon shared the GODR\'s hopes for 
allocation of IFI money to the electricity sector. END 
SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (SBU) The GODR and electricity generating companies are 
in a public dispute over debt the companies claim the GODR 
owes for subsidies and payment arrears following months of 
financial losses.  Cash poor in the past few weeks, companies 
have felt it impossible to continue selling power at a loss. 
Moreover, they have, in many cases, quit importing fuel and 
lowered generating levels, creating growing blackouts. 
 
3.  (SBU)  The latest development was a February 5 GODR 
announcement naming a commission made up of Finance Secretary 
Calderon, Electricity Superintendent George Reinoso, State 
Electricity Company (CDEEE) Administrator Cesar Sanchez, 
Commission for Public Enterprise Reform President Rafael 
Montilla, along with Police General Candelier and Armed 
Forces General Soto Jimenez.  (Note: Candelier, associated 
with human rights abuses and extrajudicial killings by police 
that occurred while he was National Police Commander, and 
military head Jimenez were members of the now defunct 
exchange rate commission appointed in November that was 
widely viewed as a measure to intimidate exchange traders 
into lowering the peso exchange rate.  End Note.) 
 
-------------- 
More problems? 
-------------- 
 
4.  (SBU) Local press (comment: not always accurate) reported 
that the commission was established to investigate why the 
generating companies are shut down and demanding payments for 
debt the GODR does not recognize.  The appointment of the 
commission produced an immediate reaction from generating 
companies, which view it as an attempt by the government to 
intimidate them into reducing their debt claims and 
restarting the electricity plants. 
 
5.  (C) A local World Bank representative told econoff that 
World Bank was concerned and that the latest developments 
could make approval of the $100 million electricity sector 
loan (anticipated February 12) more difficult.  He explained 
that some board members had already expressed reservations 
about the loan even prior to the announcement of the 
commission.  He reported similar assessments by International 
Monetary Fund representatives about the Standby Agreement 
scheduled for board consideration February 11.  British 
Ambassador to the Dominican Republic also told the Embassy he 
was worried about the government\'s intentions in establishing 
the commission.  He said that he intended to raise the matter 
with President Mejia on February 10. 
 
---------------- 
No Harm, No Foul 
---------------- 
 
6.  (SBU)  In contrast, GODR and military officials asserted 
to Embassy officers that the press reports were inaccurate. 
Electricity Superintendent George Reinoso said that the 
commission was not intended to pressure the companies in any 
manner.  He explained that it was established to reconcile 
GODR debt, determine fuel company fuel stocks, and review a 
sector study done last year by international accounting and 
business advisory group Grant Thornton.  He said that the 
GODR had no intention of sending military personnel into 
power plants.  This tracked with what a military source had 
told the Embassy\'s Defense Attache. 
 
7.  (SBU) Secretary of Finance Rafael Calderon, also, told 
DCM late February 6 that the media had misinterpreted the 
purpose and the composition of the committee announced at the 
February 5 cabinet meeting.  Calderon said that participants 
had discussed publishing the findings of the Grant Thornton 
audit, and the President decided that a new group headed by 
officials involved with the electricity sector would decide 
which parts could be made public.  Calderon said that the 
IFIs were getting unduly alarmed about the presence of police 
and military officers on the commission and asserted that it 
was common in Latin America to call on senior military 
officers for such tasks.  He emphasized to the DCM (and 
earlier in the day, to the press) that there was &absolutely 
no intention to intimidate anyone and not the slightest idea 
of militarizing the electricity sector.  A representative 
from Virginia-based AES did report that Police General 
Candelier had contacted an AES employee the afternoon of 
February 6 to request a courtesy call at the company\'s Andres 
plant.  Other than this, our sources report no action taken 
by the military or non-military members of the commission to 
date. 
 
---------------------- 
But, Some Disagreement 
---------------------- 
 
8.  (SBU) The GODR and the electricity generators are in 
negotiations over the division of the USD 20 million from the 
IDB social sector loan to be used for the electricity sector. 
 Calderon emphasized the GODR,s flexibility and said that 
the private sector positions have been progressively 
modified; he was awaiting a reply to the GODR\'s most recent 
offer. 
 
9.  (SBU) Calderon is emphatic and indignant concerning the 
differences over amounts owed to generators at Haina and 
Itabo.  He maintained, as in the press, that the GODR,s net 
debt to Haina is USD 15 million, and he dismissed Haina,s 
claim of USD 40 million as an outrageous attempt to shift the 
various debts incurred by management to the GODR.  After 
discussion, Haina has suggested that the GODR accept its 
estimate of the net debt as USD 20 million.  If there is no 
agreement soon, the government will take the matter to 
arbitration. Similarly, he said, the GODR owes Itabo 
operators a net of USD 21 million or 22 million, while they 
are asking 30 million.  Calderon asserted that Haina 
operators had borrowed abroad and had made a significant 
distribution of expected profits to shareholders, even though 
they were making paper losses; the GODR returned the pesos 44 
million (about USD 80,000) check it received as a 50 percent 
shareholder.  The companies allege that the government is 
seeking to divide the group by offering conditional payments 
for amounts less than is owed. 
 
---------- 
What Next? 
---------- 
 
10.  (SBU) For medium-term financing of the sector, the GODR 
hopes to raise the percentages of forthcoming loans to be 
directed to the electricity sector.  In addition to the USD 
20 million now awaiting distribution: 
 
- the USD 100m World Bank loan for the social sector now 
includes USD 80 million for electricity; the GODR wishes to 
raise this to USD 90 million. 
 
- - of USD 50 million remaining to come from the IDB, the 
GODR hopes to advance disbursement to March or April and to 
devote USD 15 million to the electricity sector. 
 
11.  (SBU) If these proposals are accepted there would be USD 
105 million available between now and June, of which USD 40 
million would go for fuel purchases and USD 65 million would 
be devoted to reducing arrears to participants in the sector. 
 Calderon estimates that the USD 40 million for fuel, along 
with peso-denominated payments from clients and from the 
government would amount to approximately four billion pesos, 
sufficient for current needs with no increase in debt.  This 
is the outline of the GODR,s proposal to be made to the 
operators and to the World Bank. 
 
12.  (SBU)  Calderon believes that IFI lending and the Paris 
Club rescheduling should make sufficient foreign exchange 
available to drive the exchange rate for the dollar down from 
the current RD 55 to close to RD 40, a rate that will allow 
the sector to stabilize.  He also reiterated that the GODR 
has absolutely no interest in purchasing the EdeEste 
distributor, which AES announced it intends to sell.  The 
GODR intention is the opposite, to privatize greater 
percentages of EdeSur and EdeNorte than before. 
 
13.  (SBU) The Secretary was adamant in maintaining that the 
electricity generators were using the country\'s difficult 
situation as an opportunity to blackmail the GODR.  He 
pointed to reports that Haina had sent employees home that 
day in case of a militarization effort.  &We have been 
flexible, open, and cooperative.  We have not threatened 
anyone.  But the Government \"cannot give in to blackmail.\" 
 
-------- 
COMMENT: 
-------- 
 
14.  (SBU) Though some agreement may be reached this week on 
the distribution of the first $20 million, the GODR and 
generating companies remain very far apart on analysis of the 
sector\'s problems.  A solution will probably require months 
of work, active World Bank intervention, and GODR political 
will. 
 
15.  (SBU) For now, appointment of this commission, likely 
intended as a warning to the companies and as a negotiating 
tactic by the GODR, appears to have been another 
miscalculation as the government desperately looks for ways 
to get electricity back on line.  While officials have 
downplayed the significance of the appointment of this 
commission, it nevertheless has worried companies and the 
IFIs.  Though a military/government commission may be nothing 
more than an action in keeping with local political style, it 
is not the confidence building measure the country 
desperately needs.  END COMMENT. 
HERTELL 
"
"13858","2/10/2004 19:43","04SANTODOMINGO863","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 000863 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/USOAS, IO/UNP, AND DRL 
STATE PASS AID/LAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, KWMN, DR, MX 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: UN\'S INSTRAW GETS NEW DIRECTOR 
 
 
1.  Dr. Carmen Moreno, the recently arrived new director of 
the UN International Research and Training Institute for the 
Advancement of Women (INSTRAW), briefed local diplomats on 
her plan to revitalize the UN entity, at a breakfast hosted 
by the Spanish ambassador February 3.  Moreno, former Mexican 
ambassador to the OAS and Guatemala, was named as part of a 
UNGA mandate to resuscitate INSTRAW, which had atrophied as 
its funding dried up in recent years.  At the moment, aside 
from the director, INSTRAW has a staff of five at its Santo 
Domingo headquarters, of whom only one is a professional 
researcher.  Moreno anticipated visits by UN officials from 
New York to help her craft a new strategy for the institute. 
 
2. Moreno said she had developed her proposals in 
consultations at UN and OAS headquarters, with key permreps, 
and with research and academic institutions.  She identified 
as priorities: 
 
-- Addressing problems of migration of women, in particular 
criminally organized trafficking in persons; 
 
-- Local/municipal training of women for development, using 
computer technology to provide access to information and the 
wider world; 
 
-- Advancing dialogue with men on their responsibilities with 
regard to women\'s health and problems such as domestic 
violence; 
 
-- Reducing the isolation of vulnerable groups such as young 
women and female senior citizens; 
 
-- Increasing knowledge of women\'s important roles in 
agriculture and managing natural resources such as water 
supplies and forests; and 
 
-- Promoting women as entrepreneurs running micro-enterprises. 
 
3. We understand that Spain is contributing US $200,000 to 
the revitalization of INSTRAW.  The UNGA has authorized US 
$500,000 from the UN\'s regular budget to finance the 
institute\'s core activities, half of which is contingent on 
voluntary contributions from UN members.  At the breakfast, 
Moreno and the Spanish ambassador appealed for donor nations 
to consider such contributions. 
 
4. Poloff suggested to Moreno that she contact other U.S. 
Embassy staff involved in gender aspects of development and 
human rights. 
 
5. Dr. Carmen Moreno\'s e-mail is cmoreno@un-instraw.org . 
Website is www.un-instraw.org . 
HERTELL 
"
"13889","2/11/2004 19:05","04SANTODOMINGO901","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO630","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 000901 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), WHA/OAS (IRVING), DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION SERIES # 21: DOMINICAN SUPREME 
COURT DECLINES ADVANCE REVIEW OF ELECTION BILL 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 00630 
 
 1.  (SBU) This is cable number 21 in our series on the 
Dominican Presidential Elections. 
 
Dominican Supreme Court Declines Advance Review of Election 
Bill 
 
     The tedious, messy and probably ultimately irrelevant 
initiative to pass a \"slogan law\" (ley de lemas) continued on 
February 9 as the Dominican Supreme Court advised the Senate 
that it would not provide an advisory opinion on the 
constitutionality of the bill.  Senate President Jesus 
Vasquez had sought advice from the Supreme Court and the 
Elections Board, then formally submitted the controversial 
draft law to the Court for advice on constitutionality. A 
February 6 brief from the Attorney General\'s office supported 
the bill and one jointly submitted by 10 NGOs opposed it. 
 
Congress has never before asked for Supreme Court advice on 
constitutionality prior to legislative approval of a 
proposal.  Rather than set a precedent which could lead to a 
review of every bill prior to passage, the Court advised that 
it could not act on a text that did not have the status of 
law. 
 
The Senate lost no time, moving the bill through two 
readings, approving it with minor changes on February 10 by a 
vote of 17-5 (the support was not particularly impressive and 
there were 7 Senators absent, including the single PLD 
Senator). House President Pacheco told poloff on Feb 11 that 
the draft is now with the lower house for the required two 
readings and vote, desired by the President\'s party prior to 
the February 13 expiration of the current special session. 
Last time, action in the House was frustrated when enough 
representatives walked out to leave the chamber without the 
requisite quorum. Our political contacts cynically expect the 
measure will pass the House with several bought votes 
providing the margin. 
 
If the proposal is passed by Congress President Mejia would 
be able to submit the law for Court consideration after 
passage (following the January 2002 precedent in which Mejia 
sought and obtained nullification of a legislative effort to 
convene a constitutional convention). He has told jouralists 
he will seek Supreme Court advice and he told the Ambassador 
last week that he will proceed strictly according to the 
Constitution. In any case, if the bill does become law, 
various NGOs have promised to take the issue to the Supreme 
Court. 
 
The Court\'s decision is both pragmatic and defensive. 
Justices decline advance comfort to legislators intent on 
changing at least some of the rules of the electoral game and 
they decline to open their docket to the job of 
\"pre-clearance\" of any number of future legislative 
proposals. The Court remains, for the moment, above 
accusations of political influence, unlike the Electoral 
Board (JCE). With this action the Court sets a precedent 
further defining the scope of its duties.  Even so, by Monday 
morning it may be facing the unpalatable task of examining at 
presidential request approximately the same text provided by 
Senate President Vasquez. 
 
Sound and Fury, Signifying (Probably) Nothing 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
In the last analysis, we expect that the \"ley de lemas\" 
effort will have little effect on the eventual outcome of the 
elections.  It is a PRD holding action, a belated effort to 
keep the President\'s various rivals inside the tent. If it 
passes and is sustained by the Supreme Court, the Elections 
Board will have some messy logistics before it, revising its 
procedures and dealing with registering some last-minute PRD 
presidential hopefuls.  We do not see any of them outpolling 
Mejia in May.  If the Court were to allow the dubious 
mechanism of cumulation of votes by party as the criterion 
for determining contenders for the second round, its 
impartiality would be questioned and it would lose a good 
deal of prestige. The practical question at that point would 
be whether the PRSC\'s Eduardo Estrella, alone, could 
out-point an array of PRD candidates, including Mejia.  Our 
read right now is that he could not, because he is likely to 
trail Mejia in any case, probably with less than 10 percent 
of votes cast. 
 
2. (U)  Drafted by Angela Kerwin, Michael Meigs. 
 
HERTELL 
"
"14011","2/17/2004 11:46","04SANTODOMINGO957","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO901","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 000957 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION #22: LEONEL CONFIDENT, HIPOLITO 
DIGS IN 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 901 
 
1. (SBU) This is number 22 in our Presidential election 
series. 
 
LEONEL CONFIDENT, HIPOLITO DIGS IN 
 
Dominican President Hipolito Mejia got bad news last week for 
his re-election bid.  It should have been a good week, with 
the IMF approval of a new standby, a government  agreement 
with the electricity sector promising an end to blackouts, 
and the heartening drop in the exchange rate from 55 pesos to 
48 to the dollar.  But the PRD\'s proposal to revise the 
electoral law appeared to die in the House of Representatives 
after forceful objections from the Central Elections Board 
(JCE). More damaging was the February 12 publication by U.S. 
political consultants Penn Schoen of a national survey from 
January showing Mejia in third place with 13 percent.  Mejia 
and his advisers waved away the results and responded with 
\"come-and-get-it\" ads:  \"We\'ll see in May!\"  (Further poll 
numbers below.) 
 
PLD candidate Leonel Fernandez coasted onward with 65 percent 
in the Penn Schoen poll.  He visited the New York Dominican 
community again, between two weekends of domestic PLD 
campaigning.  President Mejia continued to cut ribbons on 
public works to boost his ratings. PRSC candidate Eduardo 
Estrella led a caravan through the neighborhoods of Santo 
Domingo on Valentine\'s Day, through waving banners of PRSC 
red. 
 
The JCE officially accepted candidacy filings of Estrella, 
Fernandez, and Mejia as the major party candidates, 
sidelining dissident PRD and PRSC contenders. 
 
\"Slogans law\" Fades Away 
 
The unpopular bill to change the election law is moribund, 
but not necessarily dead.  The Senate passed the bill on 
second reading, early in the week. On Wednesday the nine 
judges of the JCE delivered a unanimous report opposing 
changes in law and procedures only 90 days before the 
elections.  The American Chamber of Commerce published its 
formal opposition to the draft law, adding its voice to that 
of essentially all other responsible civil society 
organizations.  The Coalition for Transparency and 
Institutionalism (a band of prominent business and civic 
organizations) had earlier published a legal brief prepared 
for the Supreme Court arguing that the bill would be 
unconstitutional. 
 
House of Representatives Speaker Alfredo Pacheco (PRD) 
reiterated to us February 11 his personal opposition to the 
measure. After failing to assemble a quorum that day and 
again on February 12 for the vote demanded by Mejia\'s 
PRD/PPH, Pacheco removed it from the agenda.  About 
two-thirds of the 150 deputies boycotted the session, 
including some PPH members.  There was no sign of any \"man 
with a briefcase,\" although some of our contacts had been 
spinning tales of payoffs expected to reach 2 million pesos 
(USD 40,000) per legislator.  The special session lapsed on 
February 12. 
 
Opposition contacts remained concerned that the President\'s 
supporters might reintroduce the bill, either in reconvened 
special session or in regular session after reconvening on 
February 27.  With glee reminiscent of late night campfire 
tales, some mid-level PLD supporters evoked for us over 
dinner the spectres of fraudulent vote counts, suspension of 
the elections because of impossible logistics, and a mythic 
post-Hipolito interim presidency chosen by the PRD majority 
in Congress. \"We need the guarantee of international 
observers from the United States and other countries!\" 
 
The Church 
 
Cardinal Nicolas Lopez Rodriguez remains an outspoken critic 
of Mejia.  The bishops\' letter for the end of 2003 made an 
oblique suggestion that Mejia reconsider his effort to win 
re-election.  On February 5 when discussing electricity 
sector problems the Cardinal commented to journalists, \"The 
Government has heard from us many times what it should do. 
Eventually one gets tired of repeating it to them.\"  Lopez 
Rodriguez was equally angry during a February 15 television 
interview, complaining that \"miserable, bought journalists\" 
(\"chupatintas\") were constantly attacking him for conveying 
the people\'s woes.  One of our contacts asserts that in late 
January after discussions with the Cardinal and his advisor 
Fr. Arnaiez, the contact conveyed to the President a 
suggestion that Mejia resign and leave the administration in 
the hands of Milagros Ortiz-Bosch while he campaigns.  This 
would quiet fears of government manipulation of electoral 
mechanisms.  Our contact expected nothing to come of that 
idea, and not surprisingly, nothing has. 
 
The Poll 
 
Penn Schoen\'s poll was financed by \"a group of businessmen\" 
(not further identified, but certainly friendly to the PLD, 
for PLD notable Bernardo Vega brought us details on February 
13).  It gave Fernandez 65 percent of voter preferences, 7 
points more than last September, and Mejia only 13 percent, 
down 7.  Estrella advanced from 14 to 16 percent and moved up 
from third to second place.  Six percent of voters remained 
undecided.  In pollster\'s hypothetical scenarios, if 
Fernandez does not win the first round outright, he will beat 
Estrella in a second round by 67 to 23 percent, with 9 
percent undecided.  A second round between Fernandez and 
Mejia would produce a 73-16 landslide for Leonel, with 10 
percent undecided.  Nearly half of voters who supported the 
PRD or PRSC in the 2000 election said they would now vote for 
Fernandez, enabling him to gather in much of his rivals\' 
traditional constituencies.  (A caveat: some of our contacts 
do not believe that party allegiances will fail so readily, 
and they see Mejia\'s base as closer to 30 percent.) 
 
Penn Schoen found the ruling PRD weak across the board. 
Respondents labeling Mejia\'s performance as \"unfavorable\" 
were 86 percent; Vice President Milagros Ortiz-Bosch got that 
label 78 percent of the time and PRD rival Rafael \"Fello\" 
Subervi was \"unfavorable\" for 79 percent. Estrella\'s negative 
rating was 53 percent and Fernandez\'s only 23. 
 
The roots of Mejia\'s unpopularity are evident in the numbers. 
 Some 75 percent of poll respondents identified the country\'s 
main problem as rising consumer prices, fuel prices, exchange 
rates or electrical energy.  Only 4 percent checked 
corruption as the foremost issue (suggesting that the 
electorate has little understanding of the contribution of 
the BANINTER fraud to the principal woes of the population). 
When asked to identify those responsible for economic 
problems, 70 percent blamed Mejia, 17 percent blamed the 
Fernandez administration (1996-2000), and 8 percent blamed 
the bankers.  The poll suggested strongly that Mejia\'s 
campaign themes had not yet taken effect: 79 percent did not 
believe Mejia had boosted programs to fight poverty and 65 
percent disagreed with the assertion that his administration 
had built far more public works than had the Fernandez 
administration. 
 
A majority said Fernandez did a \"bad\" or \"very bad\" job 
privatizing electric companies.  This leaves at least one 
campaign opening for Meja if he can keep the lights on across 
the country over the next 90 days. 
 
Campaigning 
 
None of the major parties has published a platform. 
Fernandez himself told EcoPol counselor on February 10th that 
the PLD has put together an economic proposal \"full of new 
ideas\" that it is submitting for private comment to 
influential institutions \"such as the Economist Intelligence 
Unit.\"  PLD senior advisor Temistocle Montas says that a 
general platform will be ready soon and he has promised to 
invite Embassy officers to the unveiling.  Montas implied 
that the PLD has waited for the event, satisfied in the 
meantime to see its PRD rivals pulling their own party apart 
in the press. 
 
As for rallies and campaigning, both Hipolito and Leonel are 
taking a high profile.  The President is busy inaugurating 
public works projects, particularly rural water supply 
projects.  Fernandez campaigned this past week in Santiago 
and in the New York area, where most of the nation\'s 52,400 
registered expatriate voters live.  On February 14-15 the PLD 
conducted its second door-to-door canvassing effort to help 
voters resolve registration problems. 
 
Estrella of the PRSC faces a rocky road, despite his modest 
uptick in the polls.  The PRSC\'s own more recent survey 
(February 4-6, from an unrevealed source) shows Fernandez 
with 48 percent of voter intentions and Estrella with 24 
percent, trailed by Mejia at 12 percent; their 
prognosticators say that in a runoff, Estrella would beat 
Fernandez 53-47 percent.  When renegade PRSC elder statesmen 
close to former Vice President Jacinto Peynado met with us 
February 12, they seemed resigned to defeat in May. Their 
party\'s candidate had fallen short of expectations \"because 
he can\'t make decisions.\"  They acknowledged a shortage of 
campaign funds.  These dissidents on February 11 issued a 
call for \"a grand national alliance\" of \"all political and 
social sectors\" to agree on \"a minimum program of government 
for the next eight years.\"  They had no specifics to suggest 
to us. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Bainbridge Cowell. 
HERTELL 
"
"14040","2/18/2004 13:15","04SANTODOMINGO990","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 000990 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/OMA; TREASURY FOR DO:NLEE, 
LLAMONICA, RTOLOUI; PARIS FOR TREASURY ATTACHE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/18/2007 
TAGS: DR, EFIN 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC-PARIS CLUB: AVOIDING BURDEN 
SHARING FOR PRIVATE CREDITORS? 
 
 
Classified By: Eco-Pol Counselor Michael Meigs.  Reason: 1.5 (b) and (d 
). 
 
 1.  (SBU) Summary.  On February 17 Dominican Presidency 
official Carlos Despradel asked the Charge to seek U.S. 
support in an effort to avoid burden sharing for holders of 
sovereign debt bonds. Having just received the portfolio for 
Paris Club negotiations, he is deeply concerned about the 
impact on the country,s credit rating.  Despradel is willing 
to travel to Washington next week (February 23-27) to discuss 
the question. Embassy is sympathetic to his effort to 
maintain access to financial markets even for a future 
administration but appreciates the significant downside of 
backing away from an IMF commitment just days after the 
standby was approved.  End summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) On February 17 Technical Secretary of the Dominican 
Presidency Carlos Despradel called at short notice on the 
Charge and set forth his analysis for the Paris Club 
rescheduling.  Despradel said that he had just received the 
assignment and upon examination of the dossiers had concluded 
that if the country fails to pay coupons due on sovereign 
debt, the deterioration in its credit rating will be very 
costly when it faces renewal in 2006 of its issue of USD 500 
million in sovereign bonds.  (\"I do not expect to be in the 
government at that time, but this is a point of principle for 
me, a matter of national interest.\") 
 
3. (SBU) Talks with the Paris Club are scheduled for March 5 
but he finds this gives insufficient time to prepare.  Even 
so, after conferring with the IMF, he is aiming to meet the 
March 5 date.  He asked the Charge to advise U.S. authorities 
of this plight and to seek U.S. support for continuing to 
make coupon payments on sovereign bonds, despite the 
country,s formal commitment to comparable treatment for 
other creditors. 
 
Background 
- - - - - - - - - 
 
4.  (SBU) In its program for the standby agreement renewed, 
finally, on February 12, the Dominican Republic aimed at 
obtaining USD 300 million in debt relief for calendar year 
2004, half of which would come from rescheduling of 150 
million in Paris Club bilateral debt (originating pre-1984). 
Despradel says that total pre-1984 debt payments due in 2004 
are USD 264 million (USD 153m due to the U.S., 54m to Spain, 
40m to Japan, 10m to Germany and 6m to France).  He stressed 
that the Dominican Republic will continue to service all 
post-1984 debt to Paris Club members.  Despradel regrets that 
the agreement is to obtain only one year of debt relief; he 
recalled that the 1991 Paris Club rescheduling had been for 
three years of payments (1991-1993) due on pre-1984 debt, 
rescheduled over 15 years. 
 
5.  (SBU) The rest of the USD 150 million is to come from 
other creditors, meaning either the holders of sovereign debt 
or non-Paris-Club official creditors.  The country is 
servicing two issues of sovereign bonds: 27m due in January 
2004 was paid within the grace period, 25m is due in March, 
27m in July and 25m in September, for a total of USD 104 
scheduled for payment for the full year.  The three coupon 
payments remaining in 2004 represent USD 77m.    The only 
other significant non-Paris-Club creditors are Venezuela 
(20m), Brazil (21m) and Mexico (17m).  Despradel comments 
that each of these official creditors has provided 
supplier,s credits under ALADI or the San Jose accord on 
petroleum. He believes that it will be very difficult to 
obtain any relief from any of the three Latin American 
countries. 
 
6.  (SBU) Despradel is hoping that with support from the 
United States and Spain, the two largest creditors, he will 
be able to get Paris Club creditors to reschedule the entire 
USD 264m due in 2004 on pre-1984 debt.  He thinks that 
eventually and with considerable difficulty the Dominicans 
might get debt relief of perhaps USD 10m due to Latin 
American countries. 
 
7. (C)  The Technical Secretary says that he met in private 
with President Mejia on the need to comply with IMF 
conditions (&Using the military will not work, we must show 
them during the March review that we are in strict 
compliance8).  Despradel says that Mejia subsequently told a 
full economic cabinet meeting that the administration had to 
adhere to conditions \"down to the last cent.\"  The IMF has 
prepared a tabular presentation of relevant indicators, to be 
renewed weekly. 
 
8.  (SBU) Despradel said again -- \"and this is very 
important\" -- that the GODR will continue to pay all of its 
post-1984 debt servicing.  He reminded Charge that according 
to the standby, the government will continue to make peso 
payments for rescheduled debt but that these will go into the 
Central Bank to reduce its holdings of short-term debt. 
 
9.  (SBU) Despradel is willing to travel to Washington next 
week (February 23-27) to discuss these matters with Treasury 
and with the IMF and he expects to travel to Madrid for the 
same purpose.  A five-person technical team arrives in 
Washington today, February 17, for a morning of contacts with 
the IMF before continuing to New York, where they will 
consult Dominican legal counsel and J.P. Morgan, the 
country,s agent for dealing with bondholders. 
 
10. (SBU)  Charge and Eco-Pol Counselor took note of 
Despradel,s arguments and proposal and promised to provide 
them promptly to Washington authorities.  The Charge reminded 
Despradel of U.S. Treasury misgivings about the Dominican 
desire to approach the Paris Club as part of the renewed 
standby; Despradel shrugged, implying that Dominican 
authorities had not found any other reasonable approach. 
 
Comment 
- - - - - - - 
 
11.  (C) We were dismayed to see Carlos Despradel given this 
ill-prepared dossier.  Finance Secretary Calderon declined 
the job, saying that he was too involved with electricity 
sector negotiations. Central Bank Governor Lois Malkun, 
co-signer with Calderon of the mid-January declaration of 
intent to seek comparable treatment for other creditors, 
simply turned it down.  We are sympathetic to Despradel,s 
concern about the impact of Paris Club rescheduling on access 
to financial markets even for a future administration but 
appreciate the significant downside of backing away from an 
IMF commitment just days after the standby was approved. 
KUBISKE 
"
"14098","2/19/2004 19:38","04SANTODOMINGO1052","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04REF:STATE14279","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 001052 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR S/CT AND WHA/CAR-MCISAAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, ASEC, PREL, SNAR, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: COUNTERTERRORISM ACTION GROUP 
 
REF: REF: STATE 14279 
 
1. Summary:  Embassy on February 6 hosted a coordination 
meeting of local embassies of nations involved in the 
Counterterrorism Action Group (CTAG).  Poloff and NAS officer 
briefly sketched U.S. plans as CTAG chair for 2004 and 
ongoing U.S. law enforcement assistance programs relevant to 
counterterrorism.  Other participants stressed a need to 
define the subject more precisely and avoid duplication of 
transnational efforts in other fora that deal with related 
priorities such as counternarcotics, money laundering, and 
border controls.  Embassy invited written contributions, 
which were received from five embassies.  Two of these have 
provided assistance to the GODR on counterterrorism.  End 
summary. 
 
2. Per guidance reftel, Embassy hosted a meeting of local G-8 
and other invited embassies involved in the Counterterrorism 
Action Group (CTAG) on February 6.  Participants included 
representatives at political counselor or similar level of 
Canada, Germany, Japan, the Netherlands, United Kingdom, 
Spain, and the European Union (EU).  The French 
representative did not attend, but later met with poloff and 
provided written input.  Italy (with a very small mission) 
and the UN office declined the invitation. 
 
General Considerations 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
3. Poloff and NAS officer briefly sketched the range of U.S. 
assistance to the Dominican Republic relevant to the war on 
terrorism, including training of border control and airport 
personnel, other police training, assistance with justice 
reform, counternarcotics assistance, anticorruption measures, 
and assistance with implementation of money laundering 
legislation.  Several other participants noted the broad 
range of these topics and suggested narrowing the definition 
to address a commonly accepted definition of \"terrorism.\" 
Poloff subsequently circulated UNSC Resolution 1373 as an 
internationally accepted statement which highlights some 
elements such as money laundering. 
 
4. The Netherlands representative expressed concern that CTAG 
might duplicate efforts in other multinational groupings such 
as the Dublin Group (or \"Mini-Dublin Group\" here) and the 
Schengen Agreement.  He noted that the Mini-Dublin Group 
meets locally at ambassadorial level to exchange information 
about efforts against drug trafficking and money laundering, 
including police reform.  The EU presidency also holds 
meetings of Schengen Agreement member embassies to exchange 
information on illegal migration and falsification of 
documents.  The rep, seconded by the German rep, suggested 
that CTAG draw on the existing information exchanges under 
these programs. 
 
Ongoing Programs 
- - - - - - - - - 
 
5. France and Spain were the only participants to have 
provided assistance to the Dominican Republic specifically 
focused on counterterrorism (CT):  a French expert from RAID 
(French acronym for an elite French police unit specialized 
in CT) conducted an \"audit\" of the rapid action group of the 
Dominican National Police, November 28 - December 5, 2003. 
The same Dominican police group had already had two training 
sessions by experts from the BRI (Brigade of Research and 
Intervention) of the City of Paris.  Spain in March 2003 held 
an FATF/GAFI seminar for Latin American countries on 
combatting terrorist-related money laundering, which included 
Dominican participants. 
 
6. Japan provides training to approximately 80 Dominicans per 
year in all areas of assistance, including drug enforcement, 
crime prevention, criminal investigation, and police 
management.  There has been no CT-oriented training, but 
Japan offers courses in six CT-related areas which would be 
open to Dominicans if requested by the GODR (from a book of 
available cooperation programs which the GOJ distributes each 
year):  migration control, airport security, customs 
cooperation, export controls, police and law enforcement 
cooperation, and the fight against terrorist-related money 
laundering.  The Japanese Embassy here emphasized a need for 
governments receiving CT assistance to assign a priority and 
budget resources to CT efforts. 
 
7. Germany and the UK both have regional counterdrug liaison 
programs based elsewhere in the Caribbean, which coordinate 
with the GODR, and Germany provided an in-country training 
course on this topic for 22 Dominican policemen in 2003.  The 
Netherlands trains employees of Dutch Airline  Martinair on 
passport and visa control and provided a week of in-country 
counternarcotics training to police in 2003 as part of a 
continuing program.  France in 2003 provided in-country 
police training on \"maintenance of order\" and 
counternarcotics.  Spain in January hosted a meeting of NGOs 
on assistance to victims of terrorism. 
 
8. The EU has an ongoing project in the Dominican Republic 
for Modernisation and Reform of the State, budgeted at 36.4 
million euros for the period March 2002 - February 2006). 
This includes support for reform of the justice system and 
support for reform of public administration.  This program 
stresses good governance and anticorruption, but there is no 
EU program here specifically on CT.  The EU rep noted the 
long lead time required -- the assistance follows a five-year 
plan -- and the need for a host government request for CT 
assistance. 
 
Proposed Legislation 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
9. We understand the GODR intends to introduce draft CT 
legislation into Congress for consideration during its next 
session, which begins February 27.  Embassy will analyze the 
proposal and provide views and recommendations septel. 
KUBISKE 
"
"14147","2/20/2004 20:12","04SANTODOMINGO1088","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE36743","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 001088 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EB/OMA (WONG), WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC; TREASURY FOR 
DO:RTOLOUI, LLAMONICA; PARIS FOR TREASURY ATTACHE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN PARIS CLUB NEGOTIATOR WILL NOT VISIT 
CAPITALS 
 
REF: STATE 36743 
 
1.  DCM delivered talking points on Paris Club rescheduling 
and comparability of treatment for private sector creditors 
to Technical Secretary Carlos Despradel on February 20. 
Prior to discussing the non-paper Despradel emphasized that 
the GODR is determined to stick to the terms of the IMF 
program.  He told her that the GODR is working with J.P. 
Morgan and with New York law firm to determine a strategy for 
the discussions.  Central Bank technicians have provided the 
Paris Club with requested statistical data.  A preliminary 
meeting is scheduled for Feb 26 in preparation for the March 
2 talks. 
 
2.  Despradel commented that the IMF does not have a 
prescription on how to achieve the total of $300 million in 
debt relief from creditors required in the program.  In his 
view, &comparability of treatment8 remains to be determined 
in the negotiation.  He took exception to the content and the 
tone of the demarche.  He had been hoping, he said, that 
official bilateral partners would be willing to offer help in 
the negotiation.  Given the response, he will not travel to 
capitals to consult with bilateral creditors. 
 
 
 
 
HERTELL 
"
"14154","2/20/2004 23:58","04SANTODOMINGO1094","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE37364","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 001094 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/20/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PHUM, PREF, ASEC, DR, HA 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REACTION TO HAITI CRISIS 
 
REF: STATE 37364 
 
Classified By: DCM LISA KUBISKE FOR REASONS 1.5 (B/D) 
 
1. (SBU)  Dominicans are apprehensive about the unraveling of 
Haiti, defensive about possible overflow onto their 
territory, and unwilling to take in any quantity of refugees. 
Reactions in the Dominican Republic to the unraveling of 
neighbor Haiti are mixed.  The GODR has reinforced the border 
with its best troops, but even these are few and far between. 
 The local press headlines Haiti daily, upstaging the 
presidential election campaign here.  The GODR continues to 
lay responsibility for action on the international community. 
The Senate has unanimously declared that \"Haitian problems 
should be resolved in Haiti\" and has called on the GODR not 
to accept Haitian refugees.  Embassy on February 20 delivered 
reftel demarche to military and MFA officials, emphasizing 
the need to prevent Dominican territory from being used by 
persons seeking to oust President Aristide by violence. 
 
2. (C) There are now 500-600 Dominican troops assigned to the 
northern border close to rebel-held areas of Haiti, more than 
the usual 300-350.  On February 20 when defense attache 
(DATT) delivered reftel demarche, Secretary of the Armed 
Forces LTG Jose Soto Jimenez replied that the Dominican 
military would do whatever necessary to maintain control of 
the border. He expressed concern that, if rebels take control 
of Cap Haitien as he expects, then Port au Prince would be 
threatened.  DATT cautioned Soto that human rights abuses 
would be unacceptable. Soto Jimenez said that if the OAS or 
CARICOM put together an international stabilization force, 
the GODR might consider sending troops into Haiti, but only 
as part of a multinational effort. 
 
3. (SBU) On February 18 Deputy Foreign Minister Miguel 
Pichardo observed to Charge that throughout the Mejia 
administration the GODR has tried to alert the international 
community about Haiti.  The Dominican Republic wants to avoid 
the disintegration of the Haitian government.  Pichardo said 
an international force should work with Haitian authorities 
and restore order. 
 
4. (SBU) \"The Armed Forces assure us that they are in control 
of the border; events have disrupted cross border trade and 
informal markets.\" He said there is no indication of any 
refugee flows.  He said the GODR does not favor establishment 
of refugee camps on its side of the border.  He informed us 
that the Dominican ambassador and staff continue to work in 
Port au Prince, reporting daily.  Regarding opposition 
fighter Guy Philippe, Pichardo said the military told the 
Ministry that Philippe had crossed the border without arms or 
any fighting force. 
 
5. (SBU) On February 19 the Foreign Relations Secretariat, 
Directorate of Migration and Armed Forces jointly announced 
that repatriations of undocumented Haitians would be 
suspended temporarily.  This was in response to increasing 
violence in the Haitian border town of Juana Mendez, where 
rebels occupied and set fire to a police station.  According 
to Director of Migration Miguel Vasquez, up until the 
decision to suspend, 3,500 - 4,000 Haitians had been 
repatriated in 2004; the military listed 3,148 repatriations 
as of February 16.  Tensions on the border have escalated 
since two Dominican soldiers were killed on February 14 -- by 
Haitians, according to a Dominican legislator from that 
locality; by Dominican criminals, according to the Armed 
Forces leadership. 
 
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS ON ALERT 
 
6. (SBU) UNHCR Junior Professional Officer Sandrine Desamours 
is in daily contact with the Embassy and the Armed Forces 
operations staff (J3).  Desamours told poloffs February 18 
that there had been no mass migratory flows.  On the 
contrary, the number of Haitians requesting asylum had 
declined dramatically over the past three weeks, from 3-4 
cases on intake days to virtually none.  She said the number 
of Haitians crossing the border with legal documentation has 
been steady, most of them entering through Dajabon.  From 
January 1 to February 16, 14,300 Haitians had entered legally 
and 5,814 had departed.  She attributed the dropoff in asylum 
seekers to increased military deployments on the border. 
Desamours expressed concern that fewer Haitian women were 
crossing the border for medical attention, an unusual 
circumstance, and that five Haitians had requested 
repatriation since February 5, hoping to return to Haiti to 
help overthrow Aristide. 
 
7. (C) Director for the International Organization for 
Migration (IOM) Juan Artola (protect), in daily contact with 
emboffs, forwarded reports of preparations by armed 
anti-Aristide groups to attack Haiti\'s second city Cap 
Haitien and of GOH concern over having underestimated the 
rebels\' arsenal.  Artola says that the GODR views the 
prospect of a massive influx of Haitians as a security issue 
and if necessary would eventually order the military to 
prevent Haitians\' entry.  MFA Undersecretary for Consular 
Affairs Wenceslao Guerrero Pou had requested information from 
him on international norms regarding displaced persons and on 
what emergency support IOM could provide.  Artola said told 
the MFA he would seek guidance from IOM headquarters in 
Washington. 
8. (SBU) On February 19 Catholic Relief Services (CRS) 
Project Director Jason Belanger told us the CRS Haiti program 
officer had been evacuated from Port au Prince.  Belanger 
said that the Red Cross was preparing to assist border 
communities and that his CRS program officer had traveled to 
Dajabon to coordinate with that effort.  The Red Cross had 
unconfirmed reports of increased border crossings at night, 
but no reports of mass migration or expulsions.  Belanger 
believed most Haitian migrants would seek destinations other 
than the Dominican Republic, given Dominican animosity 
towards Haitians.  With this in mind, CRS is developing 
contingency plans for directing any mass migration toward 
Jamaica, Cuba, Bahamas, and the Turks and Caicos Islands. 
 
HAITIAN EXPATS ALARMED 
 
9. (C) On February 18 poloffs met with expat Jean Bertin, 
former Deputy Director of Civil Aviation in Haiti (1991-92), 
longtime resident here who founded the International Alliance 
for Recuperation in Haiti (AIRH).  Bertin said many Haitians 
believe Aristide would step down only if the United States 
intervened to remove him.  He lamented that Haitians are 
consumed with Aristide\'s departure, not on how to achieve a 
democratic transition. 
 
10. (C) Bertin asserted that the Dominican and Haitian 
governments should work together to find a solution, instead 
of an OAS-brokered agreement.  When asked about Guy 
Philippe\'s recent return to Haiti, Bertin claimed that he had 
known of the plan beforehand and that Philippe crossed the 
border with a dozen men.  Bertin warned that opposition 
groups in Haiti have no vision and are ill-prepared to run 
the country.  Group 184, for example, needed to be \"less 
emotional and more political\". 
 
CIVIL SOCIETY CONCERNS 
 
11. (SBU) Executive Director of MUDHA (Movement of Dominican 
Haitian Women) Sonia Pierre told poloff that the GODR lacks 
political will to address problems in Haiti or the plight of 
the many undocumented Haitians living in the Dominican 
Republic.  She considers that the Haitian diaspora here is 
far more concerned with day-to-day survival than with 
politics in Haiti. Like other contacts, she doubted mass 
migration would become a problem. 
 
12. (SBU) Pierre contradicted other reports and asserted that 
random round-ups of Haitians and darker-skinned Dominicans 
had increased recently, particularly in the Santo Domingo 
neighborhoods of Villa Altagracia and Zona Universitaria 
(where many Haitian construction workers live), Boca Chica, 
and La Sabana (in Puerto Plata).  She said she had complained 
to the director of Haitian affairs at the Foreign Ministry. 
She urged the Embassy to continue engaging the GODR on the 
need for a new migration law to protect Haitian immigrants\' 
rights. 
 
13. (SBU) Executive Director of MOSCTHA (Socio-Cultural 
Movement of Haitian Workers) Joseph Cherubin claimed to us 
that the Dominican military and police are doing little to 
control the border.  He reported that on February 16, police 
stood by while a group of Dominicans beat Haitian laborers in 
Dajabon to protest the murders of two Dominican soldiers. 
Cherubin also believes mass migration from Haiti will not 
occur because many Dominicans are \"anti-Haitian\". 
 
HAITIAN CONSUL SPEAKS OUT 
 
14. (SBU) Haitian Consul Jean Baptiste said this week that 
Dominican exporters have stopped transporting merchandise 
into Haiti because delinquents are grabbing it for 
themselves.  Baptiste also accused rebel Guy Philippe of 
killing people in Haiti.  Baptiste did not say exactly where 
on the border Philippe had crossed, but insisted he was in 
Haiti. 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACT 
 
15. (SBU) Violence in Haiti has already disrupted border 
trade.  The Armed Forces chief told us that the border market 
in Dajabon remained closed February 20, depressing border 
commerce and cash incomes on the Dominican side.  However, 
residents in the region still had adequate food supplies. 
(Many Haitians purchase Dominican agricultural products along 
the border such as eggs, plaintains, beans and cabbage. 
After the United States, Haiti is the Dominican Republic\'s 
main trading partner.  According to the Dominican Republic 
Center for Exports and Investments (CEI-RD), in 2003 
Dominican exports to Haiti amounted to almost USD $112 
million.  About 52 per cent of that trade originated in 
Jimani and 41 per cent in Dajabon.) 
 
GENERAL PERSPECTIVE 
 
16. (SBU) Embassy sources agree that a mass Haitian exodus 
into the Dominican Republic is unlikely, citing the unstable 
Dominican economy, lack of jobs and opportunities, 
uncertainty about the upcoming elections, historical 
animosity between the two nations, and accusations of 
Dominican racism.  The United States is viewed as the most 
likely destination for refugees. 
 
17. (SBU) Despite the military\'s increased presence along the 
border, the GODR is unprepared for any sudden inflow of 
refugees.  Further significant troop deployments, to the 
border or as part of a peacekeeping force in Haiti, would 
require months of training.  The GODR also has security 
concerns at home, including another possible national work 
stoppage in mid-March, and will be hesitant to draw down its 
garrisons in the capital. 
 
18. (SBU) The Senate\'s resolution on Haitian refugees clearly 
signals that they would not be welcome.  The GODR\'s failure 
to process more than 200 pending refugee applications from 
years past, to develop refugee contingency plans, or to press 
for passage of the stalled migration law -- despite repeated 
Embassy urging -- are indicative of the general attitude. The 
Government\'s announced intent to suspend repatriations of 
undocumented Haitians is a welcome exception, but it remains 
to be seen whether random round-ups of sugar workers cease. 
 
19. (SBU)  Humanitarian problems could arise as truckers 
refuse to deliver foodstuffs in the border towns out fear of 
Haitian vigilantes and hijackers.  The situation could also 
have repercussions in Santo Domingo neighborhoods heavily 
populated by Haitian construction workers.  Given the human 
rights record of the military and police, we cannot rule out 
the possibility of human rights abuses.  We do not know 
whether the military is coordinating its contingency plans 
with civilian authorities including the President. 
 
COMMENT 
 
20.  (SBU) Embassy accepts the view, widely held, that 
Haitians are unlikely to flee in any significant numbers 
across the land border.  A further breakdown in Haiti could 
send small numbers of determined armed individuals across to 
seek shelter in the Haitian community here.  We see the 
possibility in such circumstances of increased violence -- 
not only along the border but also in urban settings.  This 
could include increases in general crime, Haitian-on-Haitian 
violence, or Dominican attacks on Haitians. The prevalent 
distrust between the two ethnic/national groups continues and 
can only be exacerbated by the crisis next door. 
HERTELL 
"
"14237","2/24/2004 22:38","04SANTODOMINGO1174","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 001174 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, G/TIP, IO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/24/2009 
TAGS: AORC, PHUM, DR 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR\'S CALL ON DOMINICAN PRESIDENT MEJIA 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Hans H. Hertell.  Reason: 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1.  (C) Summary.  Dominican President Hipolito Mejia heard 
out the Ambassador\'s request for the country to sponsor the 
Cuba resolution at the March session of the UNHCR but 
declined to make any commitment.  Mejia said in the course of 
changes to be announced on national day he will remove 
several officials to whom the United States has objected.  He 
described his plans for selecting a vice presidential 
candidate.  End summary. 
 
CUBA 
 
2.  (C) In response to Department inquiries, the Ambassador 
called on Dominican President Hipolito Mejia on February 23 
and urged him to sponsor the resolution on Cuba to be 
presented to the meeting of the UN Human Rights Commission 
opening in Geneva on March 15.  The Ambassador stressed the 
need for hemispheric solidarity against arrests of dissidents 
and Cuba\'s refusal to accept the visit of a duly constituted 
UNHCR rapporteur.  He noted widespread support across the 
hemisphere for this approach and suggested that the 
Dominicans could play an important leadership role. 
 
3. (C) Mejia replied that he has no interest in Castro and 
finds Cuba\'s actions unacceptable.  The relationship between 
the Dominican Republic and Cuba is part of Caribbean history, 
however, and must be handled with extreme caution.  That day 
he had met 40 Dominican students receiving grants to study 
medicine in Cuba, where there are a thousand Dominicans in 
higher education.  \"I didn\'t establish relations with Cuba\" 
(a dig against his presidential opponent, former President 
Leonel Fernandez).  Mejia said he had spoken out against 
Castro, including via Radio Marti, but he had done so in a 
personal capacity.  \"When is this up for discussion?\"  When 
he heard that the session opens in mid-March, Mejia accepted 
a copy of last year\'s resolution and of the draft of U.S. 
thoughts on the content of a 2004 resolution.  \"I will talk 
to Guerrero Prats\" (the Foreign Ministery).  The Ambassador 
indicated that the DCM had presented the same request to Vice 
Foreign Minister Pichardo the previous week.  (That evening 
at a diplomatic function the Ambassador raised the matter 
directly Guerrero Prats, who pointed across the room at 
Mejia: \"That\'s the only man who will be making the decision.\") 
 
HAITI 
 
4. (C) Mejia said he had recently spoken to Haitian President 
Aristide by telephone.  Aristide was worried, Mejia 
commented, and the North of Haiti was out of control. 
Despite the Carnival celebration in Port-au-Prince, a bomb 
had killed an army officer just at the corner of the 
presidential palace.  Elements of the resistance were in 
Port-au-Prince and forces had occupied a village ten 
kilometers from the Dominican border post of Jimani.  He had 
been informed that bandits were killing individuals near the 
border town of Juana Mendez, where 20,000 Haitians had come 
seeking to attend the weekly market.  Dominican troops were 
on good behavior, respecting human rights, even though the 
young \"gangsters\" across the border were high on cocaine. 
 
5.  (C)  As for Aristide, Mejia commented, there was no way 
of knowing how to read him.  The conversation had been in 
Spanish.  Aristide was \"very clever.\" Aristide had made no 
request for help, even though he knew that Mejia had a 
helicopter available. 
 
TRADE AGREEMENT 
 
6.  (C) The Ambassador raised the subject of the President\'s 
notification to Congress of the free trade agreement with the 
Central American states (CAFTA).  Mejia was already aware 
that the notification did not cover the talks with the 
Dominican Republic, and he waved the point away as 
procedurally unimportant. 
 
HUMAN RIGHTS, EXTRADITION & TRAFFICKING 
 
7. (C)  The Ambassador asked about rumors of a change in the 
head of the National Police.  Mejia replied that he had no 
intention of removing Gen. Jaime Marte Martinez, who is doing 
a \"very good job.\"  Mejia raised the subject of promised 
extraditions.  Papers were ready for most of the 11 
outstanding cases.  Two of the detainees were serving prison 
terms for offenses in the Dominican Republic, so they were 
not yet available.  One of the remaining suspects, according 
to staff at the Presidency and Attorney General\'s office, is 
probably not involved in the crime for which he was requested 
-- in their opinion, there is a confusion with the 
individual\'s brother.  \"But never mind that,\" said Mejia, \"I 
told them to prepare the decree and he can face the charges.\" 
 (Mejia insisted that the Ambassador stay longer than 
scheduled, so that Mejia could sign the decrees in front of 
him that day.) 
8. (C)  \"I am making some changes right after the National 
Day speech\" (of February 27), the President said.  He will 
remove Director of Immigration Miguel Vasquez, substituting 
him with retired Air Force General Rojas Taval (as heard), 
head of the Air Force in the 1990\'s and briefly head of the 
Armed Forces early in the Fernandez administration.  Guido 
Gomez is leaving his position as Legal Advisor to the 
President (a fact that Gomez has been communicating for the 
past week to the media).  \"And I am withdrawing that 
ambassador to Argentina.\"  (The Ambassador and Embassy have 
pressed for some time for this action, given reports of 
possible complicity in trafficking for prostititution in 
Argentina.)  Mejia indicated that as for Radhames Garcia, the 
provincial representative intermittently on trial at the 
Supreme Court for trafficking Asians, Mejia does not have 
adequate control of the House of Representatives to move 
against him there. 
 
POLITICS -- AND A VICE PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE 
 
9. (C)  Mejia said that he was going to constitute a PRD 
committee to choose a vice presidential running mate for him. 
 \"I\'ll give them a list -- some cadavers, some politicians, 
and some private sector.\"  Mejia would prefer Manuel 
Alejandro Grullon, the president of the Banco Popular, well 
respected offspring of the Santiago banking family in his 
40s.  But the committee can pick whom they choose. 
 
10. (C)  The Ambassador told Mejia that many Dominicans were 
telling him that Mejia should negotiate with Fernandez and 
the PLD in order to escape prosecution if he loses the 
election.  Mejia called the notion nonsense -- \"absolutely 
not true, and I\'m not negotiating with anybody.\" He finds it 
absurd that there are rumors of a plot against Leonel 
Fernandez (\"that originated with a police recruit who is 
assigned to accompany the sargeant who\'s the driver for the 
PRD chairman\").  And as for the discussion in the papers over 
the Feb 21-22 weekend concerning incorrect voting lists, 
\"Those are the same lists used in 2000; and if they want to 
accuse anyone, they can blame Hatuey, because I have never 
had a hand on them.\"  The Ambassador suggested that Mejia 
take the initiative to restate publicly his commitment to 
free and fair elections. (At the dinner with the diplomatic 
corps that evening, Mejia delivered exactly that message.) 
 
COMMENT 
 
11.  (C)  President Mejia was relaxed and cheerful; the 
Ambassador congratulated him upon arrival on celebrating his 
63rd birthday.  As usual, Mejia was talkative, jumping from 
subject to subject.  He was the one to raise the removals of 
Dominican officials.  As the Ambassador waited afterwards for 
the extradition papers to arrive, the President\'s sister 
Chavela Grullon dropped by the office  We believe that she 
has been playing an important role in keeping the dossier on 
trafficking alive with President Mejia. 
HERTELL 
"
"14332","2/26/2004 19:04","04SANTODOMINGO1293","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 001293 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) 
STATE PASS AID/LAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, IO, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN IS THE NEW SECRETARY GENERAL FOR THE 
ASSOCIATION OF CARIBBEAN STATES 
 
 
 1.  Dominican sociologist Ruben Silie was unanimously 
elected the Secretary General of the Association of Caribbean 
States (ACS) on February 12.  His term will be four years. 
The ACS is an organization for consultation and cooperation 
among its 25 member states and three associate members.  Its 
current focus is on trade, transport, sustainable tourism and 
natural disasters. 
 
2.  Mr. Silie is a sociologist and academic.  He has a 
master\'s degree in economics and has published numerous 
essays and books in the Dominican Republic.  In his position 
as Secretary General he will represent the ACS in 
international fora.  GODR Foreign Minister Guerrero Prats 
held the chair of the ACS Council of Ministers during 2003. 
The next ordinary meeting of the Ministerial Council of the 
ACS is scheduled to take place in late November or early 
December in Haiti. 
MARSHALL 
"
"14333","2/26/2004 20:14","04SANTODOMINGO1299","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 001299 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KJUS, PGOV, PREL, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTIONS #23 - POLITICS AFFECTS THE 
SUPREME COURT 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 
 
1. (SBU) This is cable number 23 in our presidential election 
series. 
 
 
      Politics affects the Supreme Court 
 
 
President Mejia\'s PRD appears to be positioning itself to 
pack the Supreme Court with PRD party members, less than 
three months before the presidential election,  If Mejia 
loses the May 16 elections, friends and PRD supporters on the 
Court could prevent successful prosecutions of Mejia 
administration officials for real or alleged abuses while in 
office. 
 
Since February 16 both the Senate and House have named 
members to a Judicial Council (Consejo Nacional de la 
Magistatura or CNM).  The CNM has authority to select judges 
for vacancies on the Supreme Court and to designate the Chief 
Justice. Members of the CNM are the President of the 
Republic, the presidents of the Senate and the House, one 
other Senator and one other Representative, the Chief 
Justice, and one other Supreme Court Associate Judge to act 
as secretary. 
 
There are no vacancies on the bench, so the only apparent 
item of business for a newly convened CNM would be the 
selection of a new President of the Supreme Court. 
 
Supreme Court president Jorge Subero Isa, a respected jurist, 
has led the reform-minded court of 16 members since 1997.  He 
has been apolitical since ascending to the bench.  In 
mid-January he threatened to resign from his position after 
sharp clashes in open court and in chambers with other 
judges; he delivered a letter to other court members formally 
requesting a vote of confidence of at least three-quarters of 
the justices.  Prominent NGOs and members of civil society 
urged him to remain. This Embassy did the same.  Subero Issa 
reportedly received the requested endorsement from his fellow 
justices.  In private, he has told the Embassy that the Court 
is under \"tremendous pressure.\" 
 
Both legislators chosen for the CNM are from the PRSC and are 
said to be friendly to the President\'s PPH faction of the 
PRD.  Debate in the House on February 20 included complaints 
about the slow progress in judicial reform.  House Chairman 
Alfredo Pacheco commented that the renewal of the CNM was 
needed in order to \"oversee the Court.\" 
 
The Council can now be convoked at the pleasure of the 
President.  If it names a new Chief Justice, the touchy 
Subero Isa would certainly resign. This would create a 
vacancy which would allow the PRD to select a Supreme Court 
Chief Justice more to its liking and to nominate a PRD 
sympathizer to Subero Isa\'s vacated slot. 
 
With Subero Issa gone, the PRD could increase the pressure on 
three other justices to resign.  All are over the mandatory 
retirement age of 75 set by the 1997 Judicial Career Act; 
since they were already serving lifetime appointments on the 
Court at that time they were \"grandfathered\" into their 
positions.  By naming a new Chief Justice plus three new 
justices, the PRD could compromise the Court\'s independence. 
The count of patent PRD sympathizers would rise from 7, 
headed by Subero Issa\'s severest critic Justice Luciano, to 
11, a majority. 
 
In 1997 when the Court was reformed, civil society 
organizations played a prominent role in \"vetting\" nominees, 
objecting successfully to some with limited qualifications at 
the bar; in 2000, however, the CNM ignored comments from 
civil society, appointing three justices whose ties with the 
PRD were stronger than their service with the judiciary. If 
the CNM wrests for itself the role of appointing new 
justices, the litmus test of its intentions will be its 
receptiveness to civil society comment. (There is no 
equivalent here to our American Bar Association; the \"Colegio 
de Abogados\" is by and large a social association ad there is 
no authority which certifies the qualifications of would-be 
attorneys or jurists.) 
The Chief Justice sets the Court\'s agenda. A PRD partisan in 
that chair could see that cases of particular interest to the 
PRD could be heard expeditiously or delayed indefinitely. 
Regardless of the outcome of the presidential election, the 
PRD will retain its control of the Senate and its 
near-control of the Chamber of Deputies at least until the 
congressional elections of 2006.  The recent maneuvers 
suggest that PRD dominance in Congress is seeking PRD 
dominance in the judicial branch.  If Leonel Fernandez comes 
home triumphant, as many expect, he would have a decidedly 
unsympathetic set of faces ready to move against him in the 
other branches of government.  And, just as much of concern, 
the packing of the Supreme Court would be a setback to 
efforts sice 1997 to strengthen the judiciary and to make it 
independent. 
 
2.  (U) Drafted by Angela Kerwin. 
 
3.  (U) This report, our entire election series and other 
current material can be consulted on our SIPRNET website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ index.cfm  . 
MARSHALL 
"
"14338","2/26/2004 23:34","04SANTODOMINGO1300","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO1174|04SANTODOMINGO957","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 001300 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/PPC, WHA/USOAS, DRL 
STATE PASS AID 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION #24: POLLS AND PARANOIA 
 
REF: A. (A) SANTO DOMINGO 0957 
     B. (B) SANTO DOMINGO 1174 (NOTAL) 
 
1. (SBU) This is number 24 in our series on the Dominican 
presidential election: 
 
      The Dominican Election: Polls and Paranoia 
 
Many Dominicans fear a stolen presidential election. With 
each succeeding poll that confirms opposition PLD candidate 
Leonel Fernandez\'s commanding lead over President Mejia 
(PRD/PPH), rumors fly that Mejia will declare an emergency as 
a pretext to postpone the May 16 election.  After the failure 
of the PPH\'s \"law of slogans\" scheme to alter the electoral 
rules (Ref A), the latest conspiracy theories suppose that 
Mejia will use the Haiti crisis and its real or imagined 
impact here as grounds for suspending the election and 
illegally extending his own mandate.  We hear this from 
otherwise sober private sector and political leaders.  Other 
commentators dismiss this as poppycock; so do we.  Mejia\'s 
campaign chief claims that newly inaugurated public works, 
more subsidized food supplies, and a hoped-for economic 
uptick can restore the President\'s popularity; frankly, that 
seems just as far-fetched. 
 
A Gallup survey of 1200 respondents conducted February 18-22 
closely tracked with an earlier Penn Schoen poll (Ref A). 
Gallup showed Fernandez with 63.1 percent of voter intentions 
and PRSC candidate Eduardo Estrella and President Mejia 
statistically tied with 14.9 and 14.6 percent.  Rejection 
rates were even more dramatic: 73.8 percent would not vote 
for Mejia, vs. 16.7 percent for Fernandez and 14.0 percent 
for Estrella.  In a hypothetical second round between 
Fernandez and Estrella, Gallup says Leonel wins by 64.9 to 
27.5 percent, and if Mejia is the opponent, Leonel would bury 
him 73.8 to 18.3 percent.  In the unreal event that Estrella 
and Mejia faced off in a second round, Estrella would win 
62.9 to 16.0 percent, with 17.6 percent refusing to vote for 
either.  Majorities said they believed \"conditions for 
electoral fraud\" exist and disagreed with the proposition 
that GODR authorities would carry out clean elections without 
major problems. 
 
Mejia\'s campaign director Eligio Jaquez, who assumed the post 
about February 18 after resigning as Secretary of State for 
agriculture, told the Ambassador on February 23. \"We are in 
second place.\"  He said negotiations were well advanced with 
PRD challengers Rafael \"Fello\" Subervi and Vice President 
Milagros Ortiz-Bosch to get them to support Mejia\'s 
re-election bid.  Jaquez assured us that Subervi would end up 
as Mejia\'s vice presidential running mate. (President Mejia 
gave the Ambassador a different story on February 24, Ref B.) 
 Jacquez said that Mejia and Subervi together could attract 
many of the 1.7 million registered PRD voters, through direct 
contact in their communities and local TV and radio.  Jaquez 
acknowledged the pollsters\' low ratings of Mejia, and 
retorted, \"They don\'t know Hipolito.\"  He reminded the 
Ambassador that in coming weeks, disbursements of 
international loans would help stabilize the economy and end 
power blackouts, and said the government would send out more 
trucks to distribute subsidized food.  With this and Mejia\'s 
vigorous campaigning in local communities, \"We will go up and 
Fernandez will come down.\" 
 
Meanwhile, the Dominican rumor mill poured out conspiracy 
theories.  The respected editor of morning tabloid \"Diario 
Libre\" on February 26 branded as \"suspicious\" the alarmist 
local press treatment of the political violence in 
neighboring Haiti and the Dominican Armed Forces\' leaders 
widely publicized visits to the border.  He insinuated that 
the show was a convenient distraction from domestic economic 
and political problems and might become an excuse for the 
President to postpone the election because of the disturbed 
\"climate.\"  These rumors bubbled up in table talk among 
prominent business executives who attended the Ambassador\'s 
February 25 luncheon speech at the American Chamber of 
Commerce here.  Econoff heard the same musings from wealthy 
Dominican industrialists at dinner that night. 
 
The Ambassador\'s wide-ranging talk included for the n-th time 
the U.S. call for clean, fair and transparent elections. 
Reaction has been enthusiastic.  Monsignor Agripino Nunez, 
chair of the watchdog Monitoring Commission, telephoned to 
congratulate the Ambassador and, when he discovered the 
Ambassador was out of the country, he faxed a note of praise, 
particularly stressing his satisfaction that the United 
States was working with the OAS to send international 
election observers. 
 
PRD president Vicente Sanchez Baret, one of Mejia\'s campaign 
advisors, publicly dismissed the notion that the Haiti unrest 
would affect the elections on this side of the island.  \"We 
are a mature democracy, we\'re going to have elections, and 
whoever wins, wins,\" he said.  \"We don\'t put much stock in 
polls,\" he added.  \"We\'re mobilizing the vast PRD membership 
and working toward the vote count on May 16.\" 
 
Technical directors from the Central Electoral Board (JCE) 
had met on February 24 with prominent USAID-funded NGO 
Participacion Ciudadana to explain in detail measures being 
taken to resolve acknowledged defects in the voting register, 
a main target of the JCE\'s recent critics. 
 
But the electoral anxieties have not dissipated.  A group of 
evangelical church pastors for human rights has announced a 
prayer campaign, to run from now until May 16, asking divine 
intervention to ensure a free election that reflects the 
popular will, and general acceptance of the outcome. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Bainbridge Cowell. 
 
3.  (U) This report, our entire election series and other 
current material can be consulted on our SIPRNET website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ index.cfm  . 
MARSHALL 
"
"14417","3/1/2004 20:10","04SANTODOMINGO1319","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO1300","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 001319 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/PPC, WHA/USOAS, AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON ; 
LABOR FOR ILAB; DHS FOR CIS - CARLOS ITURREGUI 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA (SEE PARA 1, SUB-PARAS 3-5, 7) 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, EFIN, ENRG, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTIONS #25: MEJIA\'S 
STATE-OF-MY-CAMPAIGN SPEECH 
 
REF: A. (A) SANTO DOMINGO 1300 
 
     B. (B) SANTO DOMINGO 1299 (NOTAL) 
 
1. (SBU) This is number 25 in our series on the Dominican 
presidential election: 
 
PRESIDENT MEJIA\'S PUGNACIOUS CAMPAIGN SPEECH ON NATIONAL DAY 
 
In his ceremonial annual address to Congress on Independence 
Day February 27, President Mejia came off more as a feisty 
election campaigner on the defensive (Ref A) than as a 
statesman. Preoccupied with domestic problems, he omitted any 
discussion of foreign policy issues, even Haiti.  He jabbed 
at front-runner and former president Leonel Fernandez (PLD), 
offering voters a choice between an \"uncertain, hesitant\" 
former president ruling on behalf of \"a few insensitive 
businessmen\" and his own firm hand on the tiller, steering a 
course through stormy seas for the good of all Dominicans 
including the poor.  Mejia (PRD) justified his controversial 
re-election bid as necessary to complete his program and 
avoid \"ungovernability\" under a PLD successor who would be 
confronted by a PRD-dominated Congress and municipalities 
until 2006. 
 
Senate President Jesus Vasquez delivered a short opening of 
the event, describing the Senate\'s upcoming program and 
institutional reforms before introducing Mejia (septel). 
Vasquez used a U.S.-style teleprompter that allowed him to 
maintain eye contact with the public and the Congress.  In 
contrast, Mejia stood at the middle of the long table, 
reading from a sheaf of papers -- appearing much of the time 
to be addressing his belt buckle.  Mejia\'s delivery was 
confident and emphatic throughout. 
 
New Proposals 
- - - - - - - 
 
The President promised \"in coming days\" legislative proposals 
to modernize government, called for a \"well articulated and 
widely agreed\" tax reform balancing economic efficiency and 
social justice, and announced formation of a presidential 
advisory council of private sector leaders on economic and 
social issues.  He subsequently named seven prominent 
business owners/executives, chaired by himself, to formulate 
national development policies. 
Economic Tribulations 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
Mejia began by reciting reasons for the Dominican Republic\'s 
poor economic performance under his mandate: the U.S. 
economic slowdown, the 9/11 terrorist attacks, rising 
petroleum prices, uncertainty provoked by the conflicts in 
Afghanistan and Iraq, and a fall in foreign investment due to 
economic problems elsewhere in Latin America.  He said the 
IMF had estimated these external shocks cost the nation US 
$2.35 billion in 2001-2002.  Most of these effects subsided 
by early 2003, but then the \"unexpected\" collapse of three 
commercial banks dashed hopes for recovery.  This \"time bomb, 
hidden and cunning,\" had been ticking since his (unnamed) 
predecessor\'s administration. 
 
Mejia accepted full responsibility for his decision to 
compensate fully all depositors.  He maintained this was on 
advice from GODR monetary authorities and \"experts of the 
international financial institutions,\" to prevent contagion 
to all the banks and \"a consequent collapse of the nation\'s 
system of payments.\"  Had he refused this assistance, 
hundreds of thousands of small depositors and businesses 
would have lost their life savings, he said.  Among the 
losers would have been depositors of 19 savings and loan 
institutions, other commercial banks, and pension plans that 
had big accounts in the failed banks totaling nearly RD $3 
billion (about US $60 million).  \"My decision avoided 
catastrophe,\" he asserted. 
 
Rolling blackouts in the nation\'s electric utilities, Mejia 
said, had resulted from monetary effects of the banking 
crisis.  He had re-nationalized two electrical distributing 
companies to prevent a collapse of electricity supply to 2 
million Dominicans, after the private owners (Union Fenosa, a 
Spanish firm) refused to invest needed capital.  Mejia blamed 
the situation on the privatization model adopted by the 
previous Fernandez government and its investments in 
inefficient generating plants.  He also defended his 
decisions to resume price subsidies for electricity and 
cooking gas, cushioning the impact of the Dominican peso\'s 
devaluation on consumers. 
 
Social/Infrastructure Projects 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
In a more positive vein, the President highlighted his 
administration\'s investment of more than RD $150 billion (US 
$3 billion) over the past three years in education, health, 
nutrition, housing, and infrastructure, which he said had 
been equitably distributed to all provinces and localities, 
including the poorest rural areas.  He cited programs to 
install potable water facilities, provide subsidized food to 
low-income citizens, improve agricultural production, 
encourage reforestation and fruit exports, reduce dependence 
on agricultural imports, provide 1.6 million school lunches 
daily, build sports facilities for the Pan American Games and 
Dominican youth, create a social security system, provide 
incentive payments for mothers to bring their children to 
school and health checkups, and build 350,000 housing units. 
 
An Ugly Partisan Tone 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
Mejia attacked his electoral opponent Leonel Fernandez 
repeatedly, without ever naming him.  Opponents of Mejia\'s 
financial decisions were \"the privileged, whose savings are 
in dollars offshore.\"  He blamed the previous government for 
failed privatization of the electricity sector, for creating 
an incoherent structure and for concluding costly, unworkable 
contracts for generation. 
 
Using an elaborately clumsy but effective metaphor, Mejia 
declared he had changed his mind on re-election because the 
nation\'s sea of troubles convinced him not to leave the helm 
in \"uncertain, sweaty and trembling hands, that had already 
shown hesitations and fears in the past when it was their 
responsibility to govern during the period that engendered 
this crisis. . . and even more so, since that captain, the 
same one who wrecked the ship four years ago despite the 
favorable winds, cannot command a sufficient crew in the 
chambers that are responsible for accelerating the vessel or 
changing direction during this perilous voyage.\" 
He concluded with an aggressive series of comparsons of the 
mass-membership PRD with the \"others\" whose platform \"is 
based in purple magic, the return of the swallows to a land 
of enchantment that never existed.\"  Mejia asserted that he 
was governing \"like a man\" (con hombria).  His opponents 
offered ungovernability, \"promising the impossibles and 
betting on illusions, clinging to an irresponsible populism 
that promises that everything -- even the price of admission 
to heaven -- will be less expensive.  They are willing to 
offer anything in order to get votes and to gain their 
objective of administering public goods for the benefit of 
the privileged.\"   He wound up his rant against the PLD and 
in favor of his own PRD by citing St. John -- \"You shall know 
the truth and the truth shall set you free.\" 
 
What Mejia Didn\'t Say 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
Mejia failed to refer to the Dominican Republic\'s 
Independence Day or founding fathers -- raising eyebrows 
among press commentators who pointedly noted the Ambassador\'s 
February 25 address to the American Chamber of Commerce 
quoting ideas from independence leader Juan Pablo Duarte. 
 
Mejia said nothing about the conflict in neighboring Haiti, 
free trade negotaitions, his reinforcement of border 
security, or the Dominican troop contribution to Operation 
Iraqi Freedom. He promised \"reforms capable of 
re-establishing confidence,\" including fiscal reform, but did 
not otherwise mention the recent IMF agreement.  He promised 
to represent the poor and to improve their lot, but blamed 
soaring prices on \"the abusive behavior of speculators.\" 
 
He passed up the opportunity to reassure his listeners that 
the presidential election process would be free, fair, and 
transparent, amid unabated concerns about the PRD-dominated 
election board.  He referred briefly to fellow PRD leaders 
who had challenged him for the party\'s nomination, but did 
not acknowledge Vice President Milagros Ortiz-Bosch\'s 
announcement the previous day that she had withdrawn and left 
her supporters free to back any candidate. 
 
What the Critics Said 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
Opposition leaders and some editorialists dismissed the 
speech as partisan and low-ball.  Fernandez took Mejia\'s bait 
and punched back with ad-hominem fury at a February 28 rally, 
characterizing the current government as \"inept, mediocre, 
and incompetent,\" its officials as \"functional illiterates,\" 
and Mejia as \"unthinking, impulsive, emotional, and 
imprudent.\"  \"What he lacks is the brain mass needed to 
understand current problems.\"  Fernandez accused the 
President of attempting to pack the Supreme Court with PRD 
judges before leaving office (Ref B). 
 
Mudslinging season has commenced, but so far neither 
candidate has published an election platform -- a lack noted 
formally by the Catholic bishops\' conference on February 21 
and by the Ambassador in his February 25 speech. 
 
At the Independence Day mass following te speech, Mejia heard 
a homily by Monsignor Francisco Jose Arnaiz -- top adviser to 
Cardinal Archbishop Nicolas de Jesus Lopez Rodriguez, a 
frequent Mejia critic -- calling on the authorities to 
\"dispel all doubt\" that the election would be clean and its 
result would accurately reflect the vote. 
2. (U) Drafted by Bainbridge Cowell. 
 
3. (U) This report, other election pieces and other material 
are available on the Santo Domingo SIPRNET site: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ index.cfm 
KUBISKE 
"
"14423","3/1/2004 22:07","04SANTODOMINGO1328","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 001328 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR WHA/CAR, INL/AMERICAS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR 
SUBJECT: \"JOSELITO.COM\" KINGPIN CAUGHT IN DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
 
 
 1.  (SBU) On February 28 Embassy DEA office cooperating with 
Dominican national drug control authorities (DNCD) located 
and arrested drug kingpin Jose Arismende ALMONTE PENA, head 
of a narcotics smuggling ring shut down on November 12 in a 
joint operation in Santiago, Dominican Republic.  Almonte 
Pena, also referred to as \"Joselito.com\" was a DEA \"CPOT\" 
target and his absence at the moment of the operation was a 
disappointment. 
 
2.  (SBU)  Embassy notes that Dominican cooperation was 
fundamental in making this case, including through Dominican 
wire intercept evidence.  The arrest of Almonte Pena closes 
out a major drug case with a successful capture.  Subject is 
in secure detention and we expect extradition formalities to 
be carried out promptly. 
KUBISKE 
"
"14470","3/2/2004 17:18","04SANTODOMINGO1343","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 001343 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT, DR 
SUBJECT: EMBASSY SANTO DOMINGO 90-DAY GOALS 
 
REF: EMAILS MEIGS/MCISAAC 
 
1.  (SBU) Following are Embassy Santo Domingo\'s goals for the 
first quarter of CY 2004 and a status report: 
 
Rule of Law 
Obtain removal of at least one official believed to be 
complicit in trafficking or corruption -- Miguel Vasquez, 
Atty Gen Cespedes, Ambassador to Argentina, Guido Gomez 
Status as of 2/29:   Vasquez still in place but Mejia told 
Amb he will be removed soon;  AG Cespedes still in place but 
in response to Amb demarche Mejia told Amb he would leave 
soon; Mejia volunteered info that he was calling home Amb to 
Argentina; Gomez has left office to participate in campaign, 
reported to have tendered his resignation on March 1 
 
Election Observers 
Get Elections Board (JCE) to request observers, work with OAS 
to define program, secure funding from Department as 
envisioned by A/S Noriega, secure cooperation of other 
mini-Dublin group embassies 
Status as of 2/29: JCE formally requested observers on 1/30; 
work with OAS on-going and various options outlined according 
to possibilites of funding; Dept funding awaits WHA and RM 
action; ECOPOL has contacted other embassies 
 
IMF program and international institutional lending 
Convince GODR to comply in timely fashion with renegotiated 
IMF program and to keep it on track with commitments 
Status as of 2/29:  IMF Board approved standby on Feb 11; DCM 
made demarche to TechSec to urge respect for commitment for 
comparable treatment for private sector lenders; Paris Club 
negotiation postponed last week from March 2 to April; ECOPOL 
in close contact with IMF, IDB and WB resreps 
 
KUBISKE 
"
"14475","3/2/2004 20:31","04SANTODOMINGO1361","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 001361 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR TF1 - HAITI AND FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/PA, INL, PA; 
SOUTHCOM FOR PUBLIC AFFAIRS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, HA, DR 
SUBJECT: CANARD; ALLEGED TRAINING OF HAITI INSURGENTS IN 
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
 
1.  Embassy advises that Boston Globe reporter Bryan Bender 
(e-mail bender@globe.com, tels 202-857-5060, cell 
202-369-6856) drafted on February 29 a text based on 
allegations of unidentified sources (including one \"Haitian 
official\") that Haitian insurgents received training and 
weapons from U.S. Southcom/Special Forces training teams in 
Santo Domingo in 2003 during the Operation Jaded Task. Some 
were supposedly \"under cover\" of building hospitals and 
clinics.  Allegation is that U.S. military shortly afterwards 
delivered 20,000 M-16s to the Dominican army and some were 
smuggled across to Haiti. 
 
2.  We understand that an intel agency referred this story to 
Southern Command public affairs for reply. 
 
3.  This story is close to 100 percent false.  For the record 
and after checking within the Embassy, we note: 
 
- - Operation \"Jaded Task\" was scheduled for March 2003. 
This special forces training exercise is carried out every 
other year in a partner country in the hemisphere.  The 2003 
exercise was scheduled for Peru but when Peruvian authorities 
were unable to host, venue was changed to the Dominican 
Republic.  Though some initial survey work was done, in fact 
the exercise did not repeat not take place. 
 
- - Two clinics and two schools were in fact repaired or 
built in May 2003 by Seabees on exercises in operation \"New 
Horizons.\" 
 
- - Under the U.S. program for Foreign Military Financing 
(FMF), the U.S. has arranged to provide the Dominican 
military with 20,000 reconditioned M-16 A1 rifles, previously 
used by the U.S. National Guard.  None of these -- repeat 
none -- has yet been delivered. 
 
- - The United States military has not at any time provided 
military training in the Dominican Republic for Haitians or 
for private contractor paramilitaries. 
 
- - It is true that in early 2003 Foreign Minister Tolentino 
Dipp asked the Embassy for details about planned military 
training, and the Embassy furnished this information.  This 
occurred in the context of unfounded press reports alleging 
that U.S. forces would number in the thousands and that they 
would be engaged in tasks other than training. 
 
 
KUBISKE 
"
"14656","3/6/2004 17:49","04SANTODOMINGO1515","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 001515 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR HAITI TASK FORCE, WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR, PGOV, HA, DR 
SUBJECT: CANARD II: DOMINICAN RIFLES FOR HAITI 
 
 
1.  Secretary of the Armed Forces Soto Jimenez told the press 
on March 5 that the Dominican Republic has received no rpt no 
arms from the USG and commented that the figure of 3,500 
weapons used in questions to WHA Assistant Secretary Roger 
Noriega might correspond to annual licensed imports of arms 
(of all types) for sale by registered gun shops in the 
country. These are not military weapons; they are pistols, 
revolvers, hunting rifles and shotguns (never rifles) for use 
by private security services.  Import permits are issued by 
the military, are monitored by the military and are stored in 
military facilities until released to the authorized dealer. 
He said that recent Dominican military purchases of weapons 
have been limited to Galil rifles (Israel) and P-90 rifles 
(Belgium) for use by Dominican special forces and none were 
unaccounted for. 
 
2.  Embassy records confirm that the USG has not furnished 
any weapons to the Dominican government since 1991 (that case 
was for 1500 pistols).  A current Foreign Military Financing 
(FMF) case will provide 20,000 refurbished M-16 1A rifles but 
none repeat none has yet been delivered; the first shipment 
of 2,300 units is being assembled in the U.S. 
 
3.  As for the weaponry used in Haiti, merchants conversant 
with trade on both sides of the border told Embassy members 
that Guy Philippe and his crew moved through 5 provinces in 2 
days with little or no opposition and in small numbers.  It 
is reported that two or three team members would arrive in a 
town with bullhorns, announce the impending arrival to bring 
out the population, and then Philippe would appear in the 
company of about a dozen men.  We understand that the arms 
used on this movement and in the capture of Gonaives were 
largely shotguns, hunting rifles, and pistols. 
 
4.  Rumor indicates that many of Haiti\'s illicit weapons, 
especially the more sophisticated ones, enter through 
narcotics trafficking circuits from South or Central America. 
HERTELL 
"
"14679","3/8/2004 11:29","04SANTODOMINGO1518","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","04SANTODOMINGO1319","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 001518 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/06/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION #26: MEJIA CLOSES DEAL - FELLO 
IS RUNNING MATE 
 
REF: A. SANTO DOMINGO 1319 
 
     B. SANTO DOMINGO 1300 
 
1. (U) This is no. 26 in our series on the Dominican 
presidential election: 
 
MEJIA CLOSES DEAL; FELLO IS RUNNING MATE 
 
(U) PRD Secretary General Rafael \"Fello\" Subervi Bonilla has 
agreed to become President Mejia\'s running mate in the May 16 
election\" for the sake of PRD unity and keeping the party in 
power.\" This follows weeks of back-room parlays. Subervi had 
opposed re-nomination of the President and competed with 
Mejia for the PRD presidential nomination, but the PRD 
leadership had kept bridges open by naming Subervi Secretary 
General of the Party in January.  Mejia and advisors made a 
well-publicized pilgrimage to Fello\'s home on March 3 to 
offer the VP nomination, which Fello had previously insisted 
he would never accept.  To no one\'s surprise, on March 4 he 
announced on national television his acceptance. Subervi cast 
himself as a PRD apostle with 43 years of unwavering, 
unblemished service, pursuing the virtually unattainable holy 
grail of party unity. The 35-minute talk was as long as 
Mejia\'s state-of-the-republic address.  Partisans in the 
studio supported him with applause and campaign chants. 
 
(SBU) Fello played hard poker until the last minute.  His 
rumored winnings:  RD pesos 70 million (US $1.4 million) in 
\"campaign funds\" to cover his expenses to date and an 
undisclosed number of government positions for his followers. 
A PRD insider tells us he wants for his supporters 9 
provincial governorships, the Consulate in Miami, and the 
Ministry of Tourism (his post for the last 4 years).  Subervi 
denied getting any payoff but left the door ajar for future 
distribution of patronage. Mejia also denied having made any 
such commitments.  An adviser to Subervi told poloff that 
Mejia would announce cabinet changes as early as March 9 
(Mejia assured the Ambassador in late February that changes 
were imminent). Some will probably benefit Subervi\'s faction. 
 
 
(SBU) Whether the canny, sleazy Fello can salvage the 
President\'s re-election bid is doubtful.  Chief adversary, 
former president Leonel Fernandez (PLD), is reminding 
everyone that he scored 63 percent of voter intentions in the 
latest poll, far ahead of Mejia and Eduardo Estrella (PRSC) 
with 15 percent each.  Subervi\'s rejection rate was 79 
percent, close to Mejia\'s 86 percent.  Some 42 percent of PRD 
voters in 2000 (and almost as many PRSC) said they would 
switch to the PLD in 2004.   PLD Secretary General Reynaldo 
Pared Perez told poloff March 4 that, in light of this and 
other credible polls, \"only an act of God\" could prevent a 
Fernandez victory May 16 or in a second round June 30.  In 
his call on the Department on March 2 Fernandez stressed the 
need to keep the elections honest. 
 
(C) Mejia and his inner circle have poo-pooed the polls and 
shown a resolute face of optimism.  Labor Minister Ray 
Guevara stressed to the Ambassador on March 6 that PRD 
affiliates number 1.4 million and the challenge is to get 
them to vote rather than to abstain; he sees the PRD\'s 
natural strength as almost 45 percent of the expected votes. 
Mejia\'s reach for party unity was a major objective of his 
February 27 state-of-the-republic message, and his choice of 
Fello has the same purpose. Another adviser assured poloff on 
March 3 that Hipolito and Fello together \"will unify more 
than 95 percent\" of the party.  This advisor asserts that the 
President\'s  relentless series of trips to the provinces to 
inaugurate  piped water systems, roads, bridges, schools, and 
other public works will catapult him into first place.  With 
factional splits healed, the PRD masses will mobilize, and 
then \"there is no way\" Fernandez can win. 
 
(SBU) Bravado aside, the Mejia-Subervi campaign team is 
trying to patch the gaps in its base.  Subervi in his 
acceptance speech called on PRD mavericks Hatuey De Camps and 
Vice President Milagros Ortiz-Bosch to support the mainline 
PRD candidates.  Ortiz-Bosch has released her followers to 
vote their consciences and party matron Peggy Cabral (wife of 
the late, hallowed Pena Gomez) is promoting Milagros for the 
party presidency. One of our contacts says that Milagros may 
be invited now to chair the November PRD national convention 
in November.  Mejia visited former vice president and 
dissident PRSC leader Carlos Morales Troncoso March 4 to 
explore a cross-party alliance that might undercut Fernandez. 
 
(C) Subervi, 61, has been a PRD militant since his law school 
days in the 1960s.  He has served as Secretary of State for 
Tourism (twice), Mayor of Santo Domingo (two four-year terms) 
and deputy in the lower house of Congress (two 
non-consecutive terms).  To our certain knowledge his closest 
collaborators sought hefty payoffs to influence decisions on 
municipal procurement and tourism concessions; they probably 
obtained many and probably shared those with Subervi. He 
belongs to a prominent Barahona family and is an officer in 
several family-owned companies.  He is married and has three 
children.  He does not speak English. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Bainbridge Cowell. 
HERTELL 
"
"14785","3/10/2004 12:10","04SANTODOMINGO1567","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE51580","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 001567 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR OES/ENV - JOHN THOMPSON, IO/UNP, DRL AND WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC, EAGR, ETRD, PREL, SENV, DR, CU, PHUM 
SUBJECT: DOMINICANS SYMPATHETIC TO U.S. POSITION FOR MARCH 
24-26 EXTRAORDINARY MEETING OF PARTIES OF MONTREAL 
PROTOCOL; NON-COMMITTAL ON CUBA AT UNHCR 
 
REF: STATE 051580 
 
1.  Upon receipt of reftel March 9 the Ambassador telephoned 
Dominican Foreign Minister Guerrero Prats, who expressed 
interest in U.S. position.  At Guerrero Prats\' request, 
Embassy delivered text of non-paper immediately to help MFA 
formulate the Dominican instructios. 
 
2.  Ambassador also raised once again the suggestion that the 
Dominicans sponsor the Cuba resolution at UNHCR.  Guerrero 
Prats indicated that he ha received no instructions from 
President Mejia.  Embassy nevertheless included a copy of 
U.S. thoughts on a Cuba resolution in the package for the 
Minister. 
KUBISKE 
"
"14813","3/10/2004 20:06","04SANTODOMINGO1597","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 001597 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR IO; GENEVA FOR LABOR ATTACHE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, AORC, ILO, DR, PINR (RAY GUEVARA, MILTON) 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN LABOR MINISTER IS CANDIDATE TO CHAIR ILO 
ANNUAL MEETING 
 
 
1.  Dominican Labor Minister Milton RAY Guevara called on the 
Ambassador on March 6 to solicit U.S. support for him within 
the Americas group to chair the annual ILO session in June. 
In the normal course of rotation, the Americas are to provide 
a chair.   Ray indicated that the long-serving Labor Minister 
of Brazil had been tipped to be the Americas candidate but 
had recently been moved to other responsibilities. 
 
2.  Ray Guevara said he telephoned Mexican Labor Minister 
Abascal Carranza, expected to be a strong candidate for the 
responsibility.  After taking a day to think it over, Abascal 
told Ray he would not contest Ray\'s bid. 
 
3.  The Minister asked the Ambassador to advise U.S. 
authorities of his request for U.S. support for the position. 
 
4.  Comment:  Ray Guevara is well and favorably known to the 
Embassy.  Born in 1948 in Samana, Dominican Republic, he has 
a long and distinguished career.  He graduated in law summa 
cum laude at the Catholic University in Santo Domingo and 
completed a master\'s and doctorate in labor law at the 
University of Nice, France, as well as a master\'s in social, 
labor and commercial law at the Sorbonne.  He holds other law 
certificates from instututes in Strasburg, Trieste and Nice. 
He was a Minister without portfolio in 1978, Consul General 
in New York in 1981, and Ambassador to France, the UK, 
Yugoslavia, Belgium and the European Union in the mid-1980\'s. 
 Law professor at the Catholic University 1988-1996.  He has 
authored a law text and numerous articles and was a member of 
the commission that drew up the new Labor Law in the 1990\'s. 
Founding member and executive director of the NGO Foundation 
for Institution Building and Justice, 1990-1996.  Senator 
from Samana province, 1998-2000 and president of the Senate 
Law Committee.  Long list of participation in official 
delegations.  Ray does not speak English. 
KUBISKE 
"
"14855","3/11/2004 14:37","04SANTODOMINGO1848","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04DTG111437ZMAR4","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 001848 
 
SIPDIS 
 
INFO FAA OFFICE MIAMI FL FAA NATIONAL HQ WASHINGTON DC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT 
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR FAA EMPLOYEE 
 
REF: DTG 111437Z MAR 04 
 
1. U.S.Embassy Santo Domingo welcomes and grants country 
clearance to Federal Aviation Administration Safety Inspector 
Samuel Perry to travel to Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic. 
The purpose of the visit is to perform 14 CFR part 121 
enroute inspection, cargo and line station inspection for 
Arrow Air, Inc. from March 25 to March 29, 2004.  No U.S. 
Embassy assistance is requested. 
 
---------------- 
2.  Travel Documents 
---------------- 
All official visitors are encouraged to enter the Dominican 
Republic on valid passports, with valid visas.  If a visa 
cannot be obtained before entry into the Dominican Republic, 
a 30-day visa can be purchased for USD 10.00 in the airport 
terminal upon arrival. A USD 20.00 airport departure tax is 
charged to all non-residents leaving the country.  Many US 
carriers include this tax in the ticket price, so please 
consult your ticket. 
 
--------------------- 
3.  Monetary Exchange 
--------------------- 
Visitors are encouraged to bring sufficient cash in US 
Dollars, traveler,s checks or credit cards for cash advances. 
 Many merchants in the DR do not accept US currency in 
payment for goods and services.  Most commercial banks and 
hotels provide exchange services, with hotels offering 
slightly less favorable terms than banks.  Banco de Reservas, 
a Dominican commercial bank, offers check cashing and 
accommodation exchange services in the Embassy from 0900-1535 
during official workdays.  USG employees are permitted to 
cash personal checks and can elect to either receive US 
Dollars or Dominican Pesos.  US credit cards, especially Visa 
and Mastercard, are widely accepted in major cities and 
tourist areas. 
 
--------------------- 
4.  Medical Attention 
--------------------- 
In the event medical services from Embassy Health 
professionals are needed, visitors will be expected to 
provide a copy of their orders upon receipt of care.  In 
cases of emergency, please contact Post One at (809) 
221-2171, extension 4398 or (809) 731-4398. 
 
------------------------- 
5.  Cellular Phone Rental 
------------------------- 
Cell phone rental is available through Codetel, a local 
provider.  Rental costs may vary, but on average cost is USD 
$1 per day.  Outgoing calls are approximately USD .50 per 
minute for calls within the Dominican Republic and USD .50 
per minute, plus long distance charges, for international 
calls. 
 
----------------------------- 
6.  Country Threat Assessment 
----------------------------- 
A)  Terrorism:  The Dominican Republic (DR) is considered low 
threatpost for terrorism.  There are no indigenous terrorist 
groups operating in the DR.  However, transnational terrorism 
is a possibility due to a number of factors, some of which 
include porous borders, a culture of corruption, inept 
police, and the Dominican Republic\'s support for the war in 
Iraq.  These factors, and others, make the DR a potential 
target for transnational terrorism. 
B)  Crime:  The Dominican Republic is considered a high 
threat post for crime.  Street robberies, pick pocketing, 
credit card fraud, ATM fraud, burglaries, and theft from 
vehicles are all common crimes in the Dominican Republic. If 
you are the victim of a street robbery, do not resist. 
Statistically, everyone who resists robbery is injured. 
Those who cooperate with robbers i.e., give them some money, 
are always left unharmed.  To avoid credit card fraud, avoid 
excessive use of credit cards while in country.  Contact your 
card provider and advise them what charges you will be making 
while visiting the DR.  Keep a close watch over your credit 
card charges even weeks after leaving the Dominican Republic. 
  Fraudulent charges may not appear until well after you have 
returned to your place of origin. To avoid ATM fraud, use 
only ATMs that are located in major hotels, or collocated 
with banks.  Avoid using carro publicos, the least expensive 
type of taxi.  Many travelers have reported being pick 
pocketed in these vehicles.  Use established taxi services, 
or hotel taxis, which are considered safe. 
HERTELL 
"
"14899","3/12/2004 14:57","04SANTODOMINGO1657","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE44603","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 001657 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), IO/UNP, DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, IO, PREL, AORC 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: NO REPLY ON U.S. POSTIONS FOR 
60TH UNCHR 
 
REF: STATE 44603 
 
1. (U)  Poloffs delivered reftel talking points to Ambassador 
Rhadys Abreu de Polanco, Deputy Director of the International 
Organizations Desk at the GODR Ministry of Foreign Affairs on 
March 4, 2004.  In follow-up conversations on March 9 and 11, 
Ambassador Abreu apologized for her inability to convey an 
official response on behalf of the GODR.  Ambassador Abreu 
told poloff that she sent a memorandum to Foreign Minister 
Frank Guerrero Prats concerning the UNCHR, but had not 
received the authority to convey a response to the USG. 
Ambassador Abreu said that it is her personal opinion that 
the GODR would support the USG on the majority of its 
requests.  She refused to discuss potential areas for 
disagreement.  Ambassador Abreu told poloff that she would 
travel to Geneva on April 3 as a member of the GODR\'s 
delegation at the UNCHR.  Any further substantive response 
will be reported septel. 
KUBISKE 
"
"14900","3/12/2004 15:03","04SANTODOMINGO1658","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","03STATE308182","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 001658 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), L/LEI (FUENTES AND TAYLOR) 
JUSTICE FOR CRIM/OIA (J. MAZUREK AND R. GOLDMAN) 
US MARSHAL SERVICE PLEASE PASS TO C. DUDLEY 
DEA FOR OF, OFI, DO, DOC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM, PINR, SNAR, DR 
SUBJECT: DRUG KINGPIN EXTRADITED FROM THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
 
REF: A. 03 STATE 308182 
 
     B. SANTO DOMINGO 01328 
 
 1.  (SBU)  On March 10, 2004, Jose Arismendy Almonte Pena 
(a.k.a. Joselito.com) was extradited from the Dominican 
Republic.  The Dominican National Directorate for Drug 
Control (DNCD) worked closely with the DEA to arrest the 
fugitive at the only tollbooth on the highway between 
Santiago to Santo Domingo.  Almonte Pena is wanted in the 
Federal District of Puerto Rico to stand trial on numerous 
narcotics charges.  Almonte Pena had been designated by the 
DEA as a Consolidated Priority Organization Target (CPOT) and 
his arrest and speedy extradition mark a high point in the 
cooperation between the USG and GODR on law enforcement 
issues. 
 
2.  (SBU)  At the urging of both DNCD and emboffs, the U.S. 
extradition request for Almonte Pena was expedited by the 
Dominican Attorney General\'s Office, the Foreign Ministry and 
the legal office of the President.  Completing an extradition 
less than two weeks after the arrest of the wanted person is 
a rare occurrence in a country where it often takes many 
months for a final extradition order to be signed.  The USG 
hopes to build on the success of this case to reduce the 
average time of incarceration before extradition for other 
fugitives. 
 
3.  (U)  Almonte Pena is the sixth fugitive extradited from 
the Dominican Republic to the U.S. in 2004, and the 60th 
under the administration of President Mejia. 
KUBISKE 
"
"14924","3/12/2004 21:13","04SANTODOMINGO1683","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE27013","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 13 SANTO DOMINGO 001683 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, IWI, WHA/PPC, WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM, PHUM, KWMN, SMIG, KFRD, ASEC, PREF, ELAB 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC ANTI-TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
REPORT 
 
REF: A. STATE 27013 
 
     B. STATE 7869 
     C. SANTO DOMINGO 674 
 
SUMMARY 
 
1. Trafficking in women has been  a serious problem in the 
Dominican Republic for the past 15 to 20 years, due mainly to 
the feminization of migration starting in the 1980s.  The 
exodus of women primarily to Europe and other Caribbean 
islands for economic reasons has made them extremely 
vulnerable to unscrupulous traffickers.  Trafficking in 
minors within the country and from Haiti to the DR is also a 
problem.  During the past year, the Government of the 
Dominican Republic undertook important measures to address 
trafficking.  In August, President Mejia signed into law a 
comprehensive Law Against Trafficking in Persons and Alien 
Smuggling.  The Government also created specialized 
anti-trafficking units at the National Police and Attorney 
General\'s offices, which began to operate.  The Government 
made numerous efforts to elevate public awareness and train 
law enforcement, judicial and diplomatic personnel.  It 
established policies to prevent trafficking, prosecute 
traffickers, and protect victims.  It removed from public 
service several key officials suspected of trafficking and 
illegal alien smuggling and sent a number of cases to the 
courts for prosecution.  It organized new anti-trafficking 
coordinating networks, worked to establish a new network of 
shelters, and provided funding for these efforts ) all while 
struggling to reduce a severe budget deficit.    Although the 
full effects of these efforts remain to be seen, Embassy 
strongly recommends that the Department determine that the 
Dominican Republic remain in Tier II.  End Summary. 
 
2. The following is Embassy,s response to trafficking 
questionnaire in paragraphs 17-21 of reftel B. 
 
OVERVIEW OF TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
 
A. The Dominican Republic is a country of origin for female 
prostitutes, as well as cabaret dancers and domestic 
employees, who work abroad generally in urban centers of 
wealthy countries.  The number of such prostitutes/workers is 
estimated by NGOs and international organizations to be 
between 50,000 and 100,000, based on fragmentary data.  There 
is anecdotal evidence that some of these women were 
trafficking victims at one time or another.  Experts believe 
that current trends show that less-experienced women between 
18 and 25 years of age are at the highest risk of being 
trafficked.  Government sources agree that they need 
statistical analysis on which to base policy. 
 
B. Principal destination countries over the last year 
continue to be in Europe and Latin America, and include 
Spain, Italy, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Greece, Curaao, 
and San Martin.  Other destination countries in past years 
include Belgium, Germany, Venezuela, Argentina and Costa 
Rica.  Desperate migrants who prefer not to seek visas or 
counterfeit U.S. passports opt to travel to U.S. shores by 
\"yolas,\" flimsy wooden boats.  In a year marked by sharp 
deterioration of the Dominican economy, the number of illegal 
migrants trying to reach U.S. soil skyrocketed.  In January 
alone, the U.S. Coast Guard intercepted 1,637 Dominican 
illegal migrants in Puerto Rico -- more than the 1,469 
interceptions in all of calendar year 2003.  As a general 
rule, most Dominicans migrate illegally for economic reasons 
to find menial jobs that pay quadruple what they could earn 
at home.  Some may be vulnerable to becoming trafficking 
victims upon arrival, by being forced into prostitution in an 
attempt to pay off their debts, but hard data is not 
available. 
 
C. There have been increasing reports of Dominican women 
trafficked to countries in Central America and the Caribbean. 
 NGOs and international organizations reported increasing 
numbers of women trafficked to the Dutch-speaking Caribbean. 
There were unconfirmed reports that a Panamanian Consul in 
the Dominican Republic and a former Dominican Vice Consul 
operated a ring that trafficked Dominican women to Panama. 
The Government, international organizations and some NGOs 
also reported a slight increase in young girls being 
trafficked to work as prostitutes in Haiti.  There were some 
reports of trafficking to the Dominican Republic to work as 
sugar cane cutters (see response in section D below regarding 
a 2003 University of Florida study). 
 
D. Several studies on trafficking were conducted during the 
reporting period.  Taken together, these studies provide a 
broad and current overview of the nature of trafficking from, 
to and within the Dominican Republic, though some of their 
results are conflicting. 
 
In April 2003 the Dominican and Haitian Governments carried 
out a preliminary fact-finding mission in two communities in 
Haiti to develop joint strategies in response to trafficking 
of children across both countries.  The Secretariat of 
Foreign Relations, under the leadership of its Department for 
Women and Children, coordinated the initiative with 
UNICEF-Haiti and IOM.  Through interviews it was estimated 
that  50-60 Haitian children are trafficked into the 
Dominican Republic weekly and that many Haitian girls aged 12 
and older are brought into the Dominican Republic to work as 
prostitutes.  Santiago and Montecristi, the interviews 
revealed, are popular arrival points, but children are \"sold\" 
throughout all regions of the Dominican Republic. 
 
In September 2003 USAID offices in both the Dominican 
Republic and Haiti received funding approval for a study of 
Haitian children who have been trafficked to the Dominican 
Republic.  A professor from the University of Florida and his 
colleague in Haiti implemented the study (to be published in 
March 2004).Preliminary findings show that a number of 
Haitian men, some less than 18 years of age, were deceitfully 
brought to the Dominican Republic to work on sugar 
plantations after being told that they would work in cities 
in office jobs.  The study also finds that groups of 
traffickers (locally referred to as \"buscones\") organized the 
placement of Haitian women in tourist sex-tourism centers in 
Puerto Plata, but that the women worked voluntarily as 
prostitutes.  In Boca Chica, certain houses run by foreigners 
employed young girls to service tourists; investigations 
revealed that these girls were not Haitian. 
 
The International Organization for Migration (IOM) and the 
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) collaborated on an 
April 2003 study entitled \"The Prevalence of drug consumption 
and violence among women victims of trafficking in persons: 
The Dominican Republic\" (in Spanish, La Prevalencia del 
Consumo de Drogas y la Violencia en las Mujeres Victimas de 
la Trata de Personas - El Caso de la Republica Dominicana). 
With assistance from local NGOs COIN (Center for Integral 
Orientation and Investigation) and MODEMU (United Women\'s 
Movement), in February 2003 UNFPA interviewed 159 women 
resident in Santo Domingo, Boca Chica, La Vega, Higuey and 
San Francisco de Macoris.  These locales were identified by 
NGOs as problem areas for trafficking.  The study shows that 
more than 94 per cent of trafficked women decided to leave 
the country for economic reasons; 56 per cent of these women 
are 20-29 years of age.  Only 15 per cent of the women 
interviewed said that they did not know what type of work 
they would engage in overseas.  Nine out of ten women 
interviewed were victims of physical abuse at the hands of a 
spouse or lover.  It also shows that more than 32 per cent of 
interviewees worked in the Dutch-speaking Caribbean, while 31 
per cent worked in Europe. 
 
IOM also funded a study called \"Migration, Prostitution and 
Trafficking of Dominican Women in Argentina,\" published in 
August 2003 (in Spanish: Migracion, Prostitucion y Trata de 
Mujeres Dominicanas en Argentina).  Connected with IOM\'s 
program with a local NGO to help returned women who had 
worked in Argentina, the study is based on interviews with 77 
of these women as well as 397 surveys administered by the 
Dominican Consulate in Buenos Aires.  It focuses on Dominican 
women who immigrated to Argentina from 1996-2000.  The study 
shows that during that period, traffickers lured Dominican 
women to Argentina with promises of $500-800 monthly salaries 
as domestic servants, nannies, or restaurant waitresses.  In 
reality, more than 50 per cent of these women worked as 
prostitutes.  On average, the women paid approximately $2,000 
for the trip, which included an \"invitation letter\" (in some 
cases), guarantee of one month\'s food and lodging expenses in 
Buenos Aires, and travel documents.  More than 80 per cent of 
the women included in this study migrated based on false 
promises of their recruiters, not knowing they would become 
prostitutes.   In 2004 some officials at the Secretariat of 
Foreign Relations cautioned that many Dominican women had 
migrated willingly to Argentina during the economic boom.  We 
have no information to suggest that this trend continued in 
2003-2004. 
 
In October 2003, ILO, the Secretary of State for Labor and 
partner NGOs inaugurated a program in Boca Chica focused on 
the commercial sexual exploitation of minors.  With funding 
from the U.S. Department of Labor, ILO/IPEC plans to complete 
another study in 2004 regarding the number of trafficked 
children involved in the sex industry.  This study will be an 
extension of the Time Bound Program, officially launched in 
September 2003, which aims to reduce the GODR\'s prioritized 
worst forms of child labor. 
 
E. Several observers estimate that 25,000-30,000 children 
under 18 years of age are involved in prostitution in the 
Dominican Republic.  Some elements in the tourist industry 
facilitate the sexual exploitation of children.  Particular 
problem areas are Boca Chica, Puerto Plata, and Sosua. 
Foreigner agents overseas market tours by suggesting that 
boys and girls can be found as sex partners.  Journalists 
have reported interviews with mothers who carry their 
10-15-year-old daughters to certain Santo Domingo 
neighborhoods where wealthy men solicit sex.  The 
Inter-Institutional Commission against the Commercial Sexual 
Exploitation of Children and Adolescents estimates that 65 
percent of child sex abusers in tourist areas are foreigners; 
35 per cent are Dominicans.  In Santo Domingo these 
statistics reverse, with 65 percent of sex abusers being 
Dominicans.  There are no statistics on the number of 
children working in the sex industry that are victims of 
trafficking. 
IOM and UNICEF estimate that 2,000-3,000 Haitian children are 
smuggled into the Dominican Republic annually and work in 
begging groups, street services (such as shoe shining, street 
food vending) agriculture, or in the sex trade.  (COMMENT: 
The USAID-funded University of Florida study on trafficking 
in children concludes that rumors of Haitian children 
trafficked into the DR to serve in begging rings appear 
exaggerated.  Rather, the vast majority of begging is 
intra-familial; children were used to beg by their own 
parents or relatives.  End Comment.) 
 
According to UNICEF some Haitian children work at tourist 
resorts as kitchen helpers.  The children range in age from 
five to fifteen.  They are usually recruited through the 
parents who pay a fee to the recruiter for bringing them over 
for seasonal work in order to generate additional family 
income.  The children are smuggled in by bus or private 
vehicle, and the drivers allegedly pay off Dominican 
officials.  Most are reportedly smuggled, or even sold, with 
parental consent.  The conditions the children are smuggled 
into make them vulnerable to abuse.  Generally, the children 
live in filthy housing, lack adequate nutrition and have 
virtually no access to healthcare services.  The majority of 
them do not carry identification documents.  Many 
undocumented Haitian boys as young as 9 years old plant sugar 
in cane fields, while 14- and 15-year olds have been spotted 
cutting sugar cane.  Periodically, Dominican Migration picks 
up children that beg on the streets and detains them in a 
group home or prison before they are deported.  (COMMENT: 
During a February 2004 Ambassadorial field visit to privately 
owned sugar cane fields, Embassy officers met a 14-year-old 
Haitian boy who arrived in January at the \"bateyes\" or sugar 
cane work camps in San Jose De los Llanos, 65 kilometers east 
of Santo Domingo, to cut sugar cane.  When interviewed, the 
boy said that unknown men brought him to the Dominican 
Republic to work and that his family had stayed behind in 
Haiti.  End Comment.) 
 
F. The main methods used to traffic women include family 
networks and fake contracts to work as dancers, artists or 
domestic employees.  Many trafficking victims travel using 
bona fide travel documents, like non-immigrant visas, which 
are taken from them upon arrival. 
Many victims are uneducated single mothers who are desperate 
to improve the living conditions of their children. 
Traffickers are introduced to women through friends and 
family; they promise some form of employment, obtain false or 
legitimate documents for the women and often retain their 
passport once in the destination country.  The recruited 
women often decide to enter into something suspect (such as 
agreeing to migrate illegally), but do not anticipate the 
reality they will encounter.  According to trafficking 
experts, some women willingly migrate to work as prostitutes 
in search of better economic opportunities, but eventually 
found themselves in trafficking situations. 
 
Minors are also smuggled to the United States by U.S. 
citizens or &green card8 holders posing as their parents. 
The smuggler (usually a woman) presents her own children,s 
U.S. birth certificates to Dominican migration authorities, 
since passports are not required for travel to and from the 
Dominican Republic.  Smugglers choose this method because 
Dominican migration officials have difficulty confirming the 
identities of the children traveling, who have no photo 
identification.  These smugglers, when apprehended, generally 
claim that they are taking the children to their parents in 
the United States to live.  However, in some cases it is 
possible that these minors are being trafficked into sexual 
or labor exploitation. 
 
G. The Dominican Government at the highest levels continues 
its commitment to combat trafficking.  The Government 
significantly intensified anti-trafficking efforts in 2003 
and has continued initiatives during difficult financial 
times.  Information sharing has increased among Government 
agencies responsible for combating trafficking.  Interest in 
working with other governments is clear from GODR 
participation in international seminars (including at the 
ministerial level) and signing related international 
instruments.  Senior officials have attended several Embassy 
hosted events on trafficking, including a working lunch held 
by the Ambassador and an interagency working group meeting. 
Government officials also participated in IOM seminars on 
drafting anti-trafficking legislation. 
 
In 2003 the Government prosecuted Congressman Guillermo 
Radhames Ramos Garcia. Ramos Garcia is accused of smuggling 
Chinese nationals into the Dominican Republic while serving 
as Consul to Cap Haitien in Haiti.  Trial proceedings against 
him and two Asian co-defendants began October 22, 2003 when 
the Supreme Court first convened a hearing to hear the case. 
At this hearing, the defendants were instructed to reappear 
with their lawyers on October 30, at which time a new court 
date was set.  On December 3 the Supreme Court reconvened, 
but the trial was postponed when the translator for the 
co-defendants failed to appear.  On January 28 the trial was 
postponed again because Ramos Garcia,s lawyers did not 
appear (COMMENT: There was a national work stoppage on 
January 28, locally referred to as a &huelga8.  End 
Comment).  The trial is scheduled to continue on March 24. 
On January 20, the Attorney General recommended bail for 
100,000 pesos for each co-defendant, which was rejected by 
the Supreme Court.  In February the Supreme Court ruled that 
each co-defendant pay 500,000 pesos.  Each was required to 
pay 2 per cent of that amount, approximately $200.   Although 
Ramos Garcia is currently protected by parliamentary 
immunity, the Chamber of Deputies President announced on 
February 24 that a resolution to strip immunity is on the 
legislative agenda for the congressional session beginning 
March 2004. 
 
H. There are no verifiable reports of institutional 
involvement in trafficking.  However, as with any government 
that has a high level of corruption, some officials have 
benefited from bribes directly or indirectly related to 
trafficking or alien smuggling.  The current Director of 
Migration dismissed 107 migration inspectors and supervisors 
in 2003 as a result of corruption investigations.  Since May 
2001, more than 400 migration employees have been removed and 
more than 40 smuggling rings have been dismantled..  Of 
these, 11 attempted to smuggle children with fake passports 
and birth certificates for illegal adoptions in the U.S. and 
Puerto Rico.  In January 2004 the Secretariat of Foreign 
Relations fired the Director of the Commercial Office in Hong 
Kong because of strong suspicions that he was smuggling 
Chinese nationals to the Dominican Republic.  The Secretariat 
also recalled the Ambassador to Argentina in March 2004 due 
to allegations that he received services from trafficked 
Dominican women. 
 
I. The Government\'s ability to address trafficking in persons 
is limited.  The depressed economic situation cannot be 
emphasized enough; it is one of the primary motives 
compelling Dominicans to migrate.  In urban areas 21 per cent 
of the population lives below the poverty line; in rural 
areas this figure doubles to 42 per cent.  There is a 
national obsession with obtaining visas and traveling 
overseas, especially to the United States.  The fact that 
most migrants send back remittances (totaling more than $2 
billion in 2003) is associated with the lack of public 
condemnation of smuggling and even of trafficking.  In spite 
of the Government\'s effort to combat trafficking, resources 
to train police, prosecutors and judges are limited. 
However, government officials have participated in foreign 
donor sponsored training activities (see response to question 
F in section on Prevention). 
 
Corruption and deeply rooted attitudes further complicate the 
GODR,s response to trafficking problems.  In a 
corruption-tolerant culture, many officials are inclined to 
look the other way rather than help a victim; worse, some may 
try to profit from the exploitation.  A historically negative 
attitude toward Haitian immigrants also makes officials 
reluctant to assist Haitian victims of trafficking.  Most 
officials express a desire to stem trafficking of women or 
children in general, but rarely mention Haitian children.  In 
addition, the legal system is slow and faulty, with 70 per 
cent of prisoners in the Dominican Republic awaiting trial. 
A system that cannot efficiently process drug dealers, 
murderers and other criminals is severely challenged to bring 
complex cases of traffickers to justice.  There is no 
integrated, electronic record keeping.  Obtaining statistics 
or other records is extremely difficult and institutional 
memory is lost from one administration to the next and 
because many government offices retain only paper files, if 
any at all. 
 
J. The Government periodically makes available assessments of 
anti-trafficking efforts to international organizations such 
as IOM and to the Embassy.  The Directorate of Migration 
works closely with our Department of Homeland Security (DHS) 
staff in monitoring smuggling activities and makes available 
reports of arrests.  The Navy, under the auspices of Naval 
Intelligence (M-2), also coordinates regularly with our Coast 
Guard Attache regarding interdictions.  All government 
offices responsible for combating trafficking willingly and 
in some cases voluntarily share information with one another, 
with the Embassy and with other interested parties.  Although 
a system to track trafficking cases does not exist, the 
Attorney General\'s anti-trafficking unit reports that a 
database of such cases will be launched in 2004. 
 
K. Widespread prostitution in the country is generally 
accepted.  In many cases women who are prostitutes abroad 
have never worked as prostitutes in the Dominican Republic 
and enjoy a relatively high socio-economic status when they 
return for holidays with gifts, fancy clothes and expensive 
jewelry.  These women are hesitant to denounce traffickers, 
not necessarily out of fear for their safety but out of fear 
of social condemnation.  They also earn substantially higher 
incomes as prostitutes than they would in other professional 
occupations.  Sex tourism grew as the number of international 
visitors increased. 
 
Article 334 of the Domestic Violence Law (Law 24-97) 
prohibits acting as an intermediary in a transaction of 
prostitution, and the Government used the law to prosecute 
third parties who profited from prostitution. 
L. There were no reports of buying or selling child brides. 
 
PREVENTION 
 
A. The Government acknowledges that trafficking is a problem 
in the country, and several government agencies are involved 
in anti-trafficking efforts.  The Attorney General repeatedly 
commented in the press and at conferences in 2003 on the 
dangers of trafficking.  In December 2003 the Attorney 
General addressed a trafficking summit, hosted by NGO Shared 
Hope International, which was attended by more than 75 
Dominican prosecutors, judges and police officers along with 
several representatives from NGOs and international 
organizations.  In his remarks the Attorney General announced 
that his office had rescued 2,000 girls from brothels.  He 
also emphasized that socio-economic factors make women and 
children vulnerable to trafficking. 
 
B. The primary Dominican Government agencies involved in 
anti-trafficking efforts (which also served as sources of 
information) include: 
 
-The Inter-institutional Committee for the Protection of 
Migrant Women (CIPROM: Comite Interinstitucional para la 
Proteccion de la Mujer Migrante) 
 
-The Secretariat of Women (SEM: Secretaria de Estado de la 
Mujer) 
 
-The Directorate of Migration (Direccion General de Migracion) 
 
-The Naval Intelligence Unit (M-2) 
 
-The Secretariat of Labor (SET: Secretaria de Estado de 
Trabajo) 
 
-The Secretariat of Foreign Relations (SEREX: Secretaria de 
Estado de Relaciones Exteriores), especially the section for 
women, children and adolescents and consular affairs 
 
-The Attorney General (AG: Procuraduria General) 
 
-The National Police (Policia Nacional) 
 
-The Secretariat of Tourism (Secretaria de Estado de Turismo) 
 
-The National Council for Children and Adolescents (CONANI: 
Consejo Nacional para la Ninez, a non-cabinet level ministry 
administered by the President\'s sister) 
 
CIPROM, chaired by SEM, takes the lead on trafficking issues 
for the government.  It was created in 1999 by decree No. 97 
to develop plans and strengthen government action to protect 
migrant women, especially those who are trafficked to other 
countries to be exploited sexually.  CIPROM is made up of 
SEM, SEREX, the Secretariat of Labor, the Directorate of 
Migration, Secretariat of Tourism, IOM, ASONOHARES (The 
National Hotel and Restaurant Association) and a few others. 
In 2003 CIPROM was reinvigorated by additional membership 
from the National Police, the Attorney General, and more 
NGOs. 
 
The department of consular affairs has also taken a keen 
interest in trafficking issues.  Regarding visa security, 
consular affairs will begin processing photo-integrated visas 
in 2004 and has improved coordination with the Passport 
Office.  To help reduce fraud, the Passport Office is 
scheduled to issue machine-readable passports beginning April 
2004. 
 
C. There have been several government-run education campaigns 
against trafficking and sexual exploitation.  With IOM 
support, the Secretariat of Women and the Attorney General\'s 
office have distributed 30,000 copies of the new law against 
trafficking to government offices and NGOs. 
 
In August 2003 the Inter-institutional Commission Against the 
Abuse and Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children and 
Adolescents launched an extensive public awareness campaign 
against sexual exploitation of minors.  Today in the 
Dominican Republic large billboards are posted with the 
following message available in Spanish, English, French and 
German: \"In the Dominican Republic we protect our treasures. 
Our beaches, mountains, monuments and our most important 
treasure: our children.\"  As part of this campaign, 
commercials and radio spots were purchased to warn abusers of 
the penalties for sexual exploitation of minors.  The 
Ministry of Public Health has also released a publication 
explaining the inter-institutional commission\'s 
responsibilities to prevent abuse, protect victims and 
prosecute criminals.  The National Hotel and Restaurant 
Association (ASONAHORES) has trained tourism employees to 
recognize warning signs of commercial sexual exploitation of 
minors and trafficking. 
 
In February 2004 IOM launched a new radio soap opera series 
entitled \"Trapped\" that dramatizes 10 real-life cases of 
trafficking based on interviews with women conducted by COIN 
and the Secretariat of Women.  The soap opera is being played 
by over 74 radio stations throughout the country, 52 of them 
in the countryside.  In addition, a kit containing 5 CDs, a 
brochure with conceptual information and guidelines for 
student groups will be distributed and used in educational 
sessions with 90 secondary schools. 
 
D. The Government supports other programs to prevent 
trafficking, especially programs that target children. 
During the year, the Secretariat of Education trained 3,000 
schoolteachers in high-risk areas on preventing child sexual 
exploitation.  The Secretariat of Foreign Relations also 
established four networks for consuls in Europe, South 
America, Central America and the Caribbean to exchange 
information about trafficking trends and to coordinate 
responses. 
 
E. The Government is able to support prevention programs. 
See answers above. 
 
F. The Government has strengthened relationships with NGOs 
that work on trafficking, for example by expanding CIPROM\'s 
membership to include better civil society representation. 
As a result, in February 2004 SEM collaborated with NGO 
FINJUS (Foundation for Institutionalism and Justice) and 
other partners to host workshops on the new law against 
trafficking.  To date, more than 200 community activists and 
police officers have participated in workshops held 
throughout the country.  SEM has begun an outreach program to 
encourage NGOs dedicated to women\'s issues to focus more on 
preventing trafficking.  SEM has also strengthened its 
partnership with COIN (Center for Integral Orientation and 
Investigation), the primary NGO source of information on 
trafficking victims. 
 
In February 2004 more than 70 prosecutors and police officers 
attended IOM-sponsored seminars in Santiago on how to apply 
the new law against trafficking; 50 prosecutors, police 
officers and navy intelligence officers (M-2) attended the 
same seminars in Santo Domingo. 
Additional seminars are planned for March and April in 
Barahona and Higuey. 
 
G. The Government has made some strides to stem the flow of 
illegal migration, but the border between the DR and Haiti is 
more than 240 miles long and extremely porous.  Funding for 
naval operations is also extremely limited.  The Directorate 
of Migration reported that more than 12,000 Haitians were 
deported from the Dominican Republic in 2003, but civil 
society projected numbers closer to 30,000.  Naval 
Intelligence (M-2) monitors the Mona Passage, the channel 
between the Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico.  In March 
2004 Iris De Moquete, a prosecutor from Pedernales, was 
assigned to the Naval Intelligence Division full-time to 
assist their agents in the preparation of smuggling cases, 
and to advise them on law enforcement actions. 
 
U.S. Coast Guard reports that Naval Intelligence arrested 
3,739 migrants preparing to go by \"yola\" to Puerto Rico in 
2003; this number includes migrants and smugglers.  The 
number of people taken into custody is usually a small 
percentage (10 to 15 percent)  of the total illegal smugglers 
and migrants on the scene.  The remaining percentage of 
smugglers and migrants evade capture by running in different 
directions during nighttime interdictions.  Some of these 
smugglers contribute to trafficking by delivering people to 
unscrupulous rings upon arrival in Puerto Rico.  U.S. Coast 
Guard reports that many of the women retrieved from the boats 
in the Mona Passage were clearly planning to work as 
prostitutes in the United States. 
 
H. Although a task force solely dedicated to trafficking does 
not exist, CIPROM takes the lead on the Government\'s response 
to trafficking.  It includes more than 20 government 
agencies, NGOs and international organizations and meets on a 
monthly basis.  The Secretariat of Foreign Relations has also 
assumed a more active role in the Government\'s response to 
trafficking.  In August, September and October 2003 and in 
February 2004, SEREX hosted multi-agency working group 
meetings.  In February 2004 the Foreign Secretary requested 
that a working group be created to better coordinate policy. 
 
Under the leadership of the Foreign Relations Secretariat,s 
consular affairs bureau, SEREX organized an 
inter-institutional commission of 18 government offices to 
implement, consolidate and follow up on anti-trafficking 
strategies; this commission includes the Supreme Court and 
the Central Elections Board (Junta Central Electoral).  In 
March 2004 the commission provided the Embassy with a 
detailed report of the Government,s 2003-2004 activities 
(Note: Embassy will send report to Department by pouch.) 
 
I. The Dominican Government coordinates and participates in 
international working groups to prevent trafficking.  In 
April 2003 SEREX spent $10,000 for 24 consular officers 
assigned to Central and South American posts to travel to 
Argentina for an IOM-sponsored two-day workshop on 
trafficking.  As a follow-up to the April workshop, in July 
2003 SEREX helped organize a GODR delegation to Haiti that 
included a representative from the First Lady\'s office, 
CONANI, representatives from the National Police and the 
Armed Forces, the Attorney General, the Director of 
Migration, and representatives of NGOs and international 
organizations.  The purpose of the trip was to develop 
cross-border strategies and networks to prevent trafficking 
of children on both sides.   In particular, the Dominican 
Ambassador to Haiti has made trafficking a priority; he met 
with Dominican prostitutes in Haiti and asked them to notify 
the embassy immediately of any activity involving underage 
girls. 
 
The Secretariat of Tourism reports improvements in its 
collaboration with international contacts to dismantle 
cyberspace networks that promote sex tourism in the Dominican 
Republic.  A 2003 sting operation in Sosua (located in the 
Puerto Plata province) resulted in the closure of seven 
hotel/bar locations for promoting prostitution, promoting sex 
tourism on the Internet and for using minors to perform sex 
acts.  In January 2004, Secretariat of Tourism staff 
participated in a workshop in Boca Chica on &Intervention 
Strategies8 with children and adolescents victims of 
commercial sexual exploitation. 
 
J. The Secretariat of Women directs CIPROM, the Government\'s 
lead interagency group for addressing trafficking in persons. 
 CIPROM and SEM signed a convention with IOM in April 2001 
called the \"Program to Prevent and Combat Trafficking in 
Women in the Dominican Republic,\" in essence a national 
action plan.  The second phase of this convention was 
implemented in 2003, when IOM supported SEM in drafting new 
anti-trafficking legislation.  In February 2003 the Secretary 
for Women inaugurated a reception center for trafficking 
victims at the COIN premises.  The center was funded by COIN 
and UNFPA with in-kind assistance from SEM and the Attorney 
General\'s Office.  The center provides health and 
psychological care, legal assistance and vocational training. 
 
 
K. The new law against trafficking in persons states that 
various government agencies are responsible for application 
of the law, including SEM, SEREX, the Attorney General\'s 
anti-TIP unit and CIPROM.  However, no one entity is tasked 
with developing the government\'s anti-trafficking programs. 
 
 
INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS 
 
A. Several laws may be applied to prosecute those who traffic 
in persons.  Taken together, these laws are more than 
adequate to cover the full scope of TIP.  The new law against 
trafficking (Law 137-03), passed by Congress in July and 
signed by the President in August 2003, is the most 
comprehensive.  The definition of trafficking is largely 
based on U.S. definitions, and includes the following for the 
purposes of exploitation: sexual exploitation, pornography, 
indebted servitude, forced labor or services, servile 
matrimony, illegal adoption, slavery and/or similar 
practices, or organ extraction.  The law includes penalties 
for traffickers of 15 to 20 years\' imprisonment along with a 
fine equal to 175 times the minimum wage.  The law also 
includes a provision against alien smuggling, which carries a 
10- to 15-year prison sentence and a fine of 150-250 times 
the minimum wage.  There is a pre-existing law against alien 
smuggling (Law 344-98), but Law 137-03 carries stricter 
penalties. 
 
B. The revised Code for the Protection of Children and 
Adolescents (Law 136-03 also signed in August 2003), formerly 
known as the Code for Minors, penalizes the commercial sexual 
exploitation of minors with a 3- to 10-year prison sentence 
and a fine of 10-30 times the minimum wage.  There is also an 
article in Law 136-03 that penalizes the general 
commercialization of children and adolescents with 20- to 
30-year prison sentences.  Sexual exploitation is included in 
the definition of trafficking in Law 137-03, but 
theoretically the general article in Law 136-03 could be 
applied to ensure the strictest penalties against those who 
commercialize in children.  There is also an article in the 
Penal Code that penalizes smugglers involved in the promotion 
of prostitution, but the penalties in Law 137-03 are more 
severe. 
 
C. The Law Against Domestic Violence (Law 24-97) includes 
penalties for rape, incest, sexual aggression and other forms 
of domestic violence that range from one to 30 years in 
prison, and have fines ranging from 5,000 to 500,000 pesos. 
 
D. In an effort to prioritize prosecutions of traffickers, in 
April 2003 the Attorney General\'s office announced the 
creation of an anti-trafficking unit along with a unit 
dedicated to combating the commercial sexual exploitation of 
minors.  Special prosecutors trained in trafficking issues 
were assigned to work in the units.  There is an AG 
anti-trafficking unit in each province.  Although there have 
been no prosecutions under the new law, investigations on 
several trafficking cases were opened or re-opened under the 
new law. 
 
The AG\'s anti-trafficking unit in Santo Domingo decided to 
reopen at least three pending cases to determine whether 
there were indications of trafficking.  For example, the unit 
is investigating the August 26, 2002 case of Antonio Made 
Jimenez, accused of transporting undocumented Haitians into 
Dominican territory.  Initially the AG was going to apply the 
original law against alien smuggling (Law 344-98).  The 
anti-trafficking unit has also reopened the case against Jose 
Ramon Mercedes Quiterio, accused on May 10, 2002 of 
organizing illegal trips to San Martin, which violates 
Article 405 of the Penal Code.  The July 15, 2003 case 
against Jesus Fortuna Pena, accused of transporting Haitian 
nationals within Dominican Territory, was reopened to 
determine whether trafficking was involved.   Fortuna is free 
on bail by order of the Court of Instruction in Elias Pina. 
 
In 2003 the AG\'s anti-trafficking unit in San Juan de la 
Maguana received a denouncement from a German national 
Franziskus Georg Kraus against four Dominicans for allegedly 
being part of an organization that produced false documents 
and trafficked persons to European countries.  The 
investigation results are pending. 
In 2003 Aracelis Sanchez Mora was arrested, by order of the 
AG\'s anti-trafficking unit, for trafficking in minors at a 
bar in Azua.  Initially the Court of Instruction found 
Sanchez Mora in violation of Articles 334 and 334-1 of the 
Penal Code but she remains free on bail.  The bar in question 
has been closed temporarily until the investigation is 
concluded. 
 
The most high profile alien smuggling case being prosecuted 
is that of Congressman Guillermo Radhames Ramos Garcia (see 
response to G section on Overview of Trafficking).  Since the 
Congressman\'s violation occurred prior to approval of the new 
law against trafficking, he is being prosecuted for violating 
Article 1 of the Alien Smuggling Law (Law 344-98) and 
Articles 59 and 177 of the Penal Code.  If he is found 
guilty, however, the Supreme Court Chief Justice could apply 
the new law against trafficking (should the Chief Justice 
decide that stricter penalties are warranted). 
 
An anti-trafficking unit at the National Police was 
officially inaugurated in August 2003.  The unit has 13 
investigators who are primarily trained in spotting 
counterfeit U.S. visas and passports.  The following is the 
unit\'s report provided to the Embassy covering 2003-2004 
activities: 
 
-Number of persons submitted to justice for intent to leave 
the country with altered travel documents (such as U.S. or 
European passports, visas, resident cards): 172 
 
-Number of persons submitted for alien smuggling or 
trafficking: 14 
 
-Number of persons submitted for smuggling children: 3 
 
-Number of recovered counterfeit American and European visas: 
102 
 
-Number of complaints about alien smugglers received: 35 
 
-Number of other complaints received: 34 
 
-Number of pending cases (of complaints received): 11 
 
In one highly publicized case, in August 2003 the National 
Police  anti-trafficking unit arrested a trafficker of 
Dominican girls to Haiti based on a tip provided by the 
Secretariat of Foreign Relations.  Local newspapers reported 
 
SIPDIS 
interviews with some of the victims, who said they had been 
promised jobs in San Martin to work in a store.  The 
trafficker remains in Najayo prison in Santo Domingo.  In 
October 2003, the unit arrested another trafficker of 
children to Haiti and the children were promptly returned to 
their families before any harm was done. 
 
E. According to COIN and IOM, trafficking organizations are 
typically small groups.  Smuggling rings in the Dominican 
Republic are loosely organized, and it is likely that profits 
from trafficking go directly to individual members.  Usually 
there is a contact in the destination country and a few 
persons in the Dominican Republic who recruited persons to be 
trafficked and who handled obtaining identification and 
travel documents.  There were no reports of trafficking 
profits being channeled to armed groups, terrorist 
organizations, judges, banks, etc. 
 
F. Through the anti-trafficking unit at the Attorney 
General\'s office, the Government investigates cases of 
trafficking.  See response above in paragraph D. 
 
Dominican Migration has also arrested numerous smugglers 
attempting to board flights with impostor children.  For 
example, in 2003 the Embassy,s consular section was informed 
of six arrests by Dominican authorities of U.S. citizens 
attempting to smuggle children to the United States (see 
reftel C).  After several months of investigations 
coordinated with our DHS agents, in March 2004 Migration 
officials arrested three Puerto Rican women on charges of 
smuggling children to the United States; officials suspect 
that one of the women smuggled children to the U.S. on at 
least seven occasions.  Migration authorities frequently 
bring children with suspect identities, and their alleged 
parents, to the consular section for citizenship/identity 
verification.  Dominican Migration actively collaborates with 
the USG in investigating and prosecuting these cases.  The 
Department of Family and Children (under the Attorney 
General\'s jurisdiction) actively investigates kidnappings, 
especially of infants for sale to foreigners who deliberately 
sidestep legal formalities.  The Government seeks to protect 
children from being victimized by those who would adopt them 
by making such adoptions more difficult. 
 
G. After the law against trafficking was promulgated, the 
Secretariat of Women launched a capacity building campaign in 
 
SIPDIS 
50 municipalities and provinces.  In September and November 
2003 approximately 250 government workers participated in SEM 
workshops about preventing trafficking.  In cooperation with 
NGO FINJUS and other civil society groups, SEM has also 
organized a series of workshops on trafficking that target 
mid level government officials and community organizations. 
These workshops will be held in February through April 2004. 
 
H. The Government cooperates with other governments, such as 
Haiti, in the investigation and prosecution of trafficking 
cases.  This coordination led to the quick arrest in October 
2003 of a Haitian trafficker of Dominican girls, based on a 
tip given to the Dominican embassy in Port au Prince that was 
shared with SEREX and then passed to the National Police 
anti-trafficking unit. 
 
I. Although no cases of extradition for trafficking are 
known, the possibility exists for extradition through the 
application of the Palermo Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and 
Punish Trafficking in Persons to existing extradition 
treaties once the protocol is ratified.  In accordance with 
Article 16 paragraph 3 of the convention, each of the 
offenses listed in Article 3 paragraph 1 (a) or (b) shall be 
deemed to be included as an extraditable offense in any 
extradition treaty existing between the two parties.  An 
important caveat is that the offenses must be punishable 
under the domestic law of both the requesting and requested 
state parties.  For example, extradition between the United 
States and the Dominican Republic is governed by the June 9, 
1909 Extradition Treaty.  Once both countries ratify the 
protocol, if the offenses are punishable under both 
countries\' law, the offenses would be extraditable. 
 
J. and K. See responses in section on Overview of Trafficking 
in Persons. 
 
L. The Government has ratified the following international 
instruments: 
 
-ILO Convention 182 on Worst Forms of Child Labor 
 
-ILO Convention 29 Forced Labor Convention 
 
-ILO Convention 105 Abolition of Forced Labor Convention 
 
-The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the 
Child (CRC) 
 
The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in 
Persons (Palermo Protocol), supplementing the UN Convention 
Against Transnational Organized Crime was signed December 15, 
2000 but not ratified. 
 
PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
 
A. The law against trafficking (Law 137-03) establishes a 
provision in which the victims of trafficking are guaranteed 
adequate housing, medical attention, access to education, 
training and employment opportunities.  The law also states 
that legal assistance will be provided to victims, as well as 
psychological and other types of evaluations.  In practice, 
these provisions have not yet become a reality mainly because 
police, prosecutors and judges are still being trained on how 
to apply the law. 
 
In May 2003 the President signed Law 88-03, The Creation of 
Safe Havens for Women, Children and Adolescents Victims of 
Domestic Violence.  The Secretariat of Women reported that a 
shelter was built in San Cristobal for women victims of 
domestic violence, but many NGOs and international 
organizations reported that the shelter was not yet 
functional and that it would not provide shelter for returned 
trafficked victims.  There are several church-run shelters 
that provide refuge to children who escape prostitution. 
 
According to NGOs that work with trafficked victims such as 
COIN, most victims are too embarrassed to seek legal action 
against traffickers.  COIN, with assistance from SEM 
consultants, provides low cost health services, psychological 
counseling, judicial assistance and job training to migrant 
women that have returned.  COIN provides tests for HIV/AIDS 
and other sexually transmitted diseases; COIN estimates that 
up to 12 per cent of sex workers are HIV-positive.  COIN also 
operates a reception center for returned women. 
 
The Government, under the auspices of CONANI, plans to open 
nine safe havens for child victims of sexual exploitation. 
According to CONANI, the Attorney General\'s office will fund 
at least seven of the safe havens, the first of which to be 
opened in the first six months of 2004. 
B. The majority of government funds for NGOs that work on 
trafficking are channeled through the Secretariat of Women. 
The Investigation Center for Feminine Action (CIPAF) was 
allocated 720,000 pesos of SEM\'s 2003 and 2004 
budgets--approximately $16,000 USD.  COIN will be included in 
SEM\'s 2005 budget. 
 
C. A functioning screening and referral process for victims 
does not exist.  Article 9 of the new law against trafficking 
provides that the state will protect the privacy and identity 
of the victim.  Most victims are referred to NGOs like COIN 
by IOM. 
 
D. According to COIN, victims are not penalized.  Returned 
women are usually sent to the Directorate of Migration after 
arrival at the airport.  If migration officials suspect drug 
trafficking, the cases are referred to the National Police. 
If not, the women are sent home.  COIN, the Secretariat of 
Women, the Attorney General and the Directorate of Migration 
are considering an agreement with the National Police that 
all trafficking-related cases be referred to COIN. 
 
E. Victims can file civil suits against traffickers but there 
is a lack of social consciousness in this regard.  There is 
also a lack of incentive.  Illegal migrants, for example, 
have told NGOs assisting victims that they were  reluctant to 
squeal on smugglers because they are likely to attempt 
illegal migration again in the future. 
 
F. A protection program for victims and witnesses does not 
yet exist.  Complaints of trafficking and alien smuggling are 
submitted to the National Police but those who submit 
complaints are not protected in practice. 
 
G. There are several examples of government support for 
training officials in recognizing trafficking.  Also, article 
14 of the law against trafficking states that public servants 
responsible for this issue will receive training.  In 
November 2003 the special prosecutor for the Attorney 
General\'s anti-trafficking unit traveled to Colombia for a 
training workshop on trafficking.  The Secretariat of Foreign 
Relations Office on Women and Children has been particularly 
active in training efforts.  Prior to departure for overseas 
assignments Dominican consuls are trained about trafficking 
and the commercial sexual exploitation of minors.  In 
November and December 2003, approximately 15 consuls attended 
these 2-day training sessions. 
 
H. There is a section in the law against trafficking 
pertaining to government assistance for victims of 
trafficking.  This assistance includes adequate housing, 
medical attention, and training and employment opportunities 
among other measures.  The Government provides limited 
assistance in practice, primarily through its relationship 
with COIN. 
 
I. The primary NGO sources of information on trafficking are: 
 
-Center for Integral Orientation and Investigation (COIN: 
\"Centro de Orientacion e Investigacion Integral\") 
 
-United Women\'s Movement (MODEMU: \"Movimiento de Mujeres 
Unidas\") 
 
-Investigation Center for Feminine Action (CIPAF: \"Centro de 
Investigacion para la Accion Femenina\") 
 
-Foundation for Institutionalism and Justice (FINJUS: 
\"Fundacion Institucionalidad y Justicia\") 
 
-AIDS Action (Accion SIDA) 
 
-Your Woman (Tu Mujer) 
 
The most active local non-profit organization on trafficking 
issues is COIN and its spin-off organization MODEMU.  Founded 
in 1985 to assist sex workers, COIN began to work with 
migrant women in 1994 through its Center for Information on 
Immigration and Health (CIM: \"Centro de Informacion de 
Inmigracion y Salud\").  CIM provides information to potential 
migrants, trafficking victims and their families, trains 
groups to prevent trafficking, lobbies and works to sensitize 
political groups, and provides assistance to returned migrant 
women.  As a member of CIPROM, COIN works closely with the 
Government on trafficking issues.  With IOM funding, COIN 
assisted 85 returned women in 2003; 65 were returned from 
Argentina and 20 from various European and Caribbean 
countries.  Throughout the year COIN also organized community 
education programs about trafficking for 3,000 potential 
migrants and children.  COIN counsels women planning to 
accept job offers in Europe and the eastern Caribbean about 
immigration, health and other problems, including the dangers 
of trafficking, forced prostitution, and domestic servitude. 
 
STATUTORY CRITERIA 
 
3. (SBU) Embassy point of contact and drafter for this report 
is Poloff Shelby Smith-Wilson (phone 809-731-4203; fax 
809-686-4038; email Smith-WilsonSV@state.gov).  More than 100 
hours were spent by Embassy staff in preparation and writing 
of the report. 
KUBISKE 
"
"14925","3/12/2004 21:15","04SANTODOMINGO1685","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE47117","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 001685 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWMN, KSEP, OPDC, PREL, PHUM, DR 
SUBJECT: CELEBRATING INTERNATIONAL WOMEN\'S DAY DOMINICAN 
STYLE 
 
REF: SECSTATE 47117 
 
1. Summary.  International Women\'s Day was celebrated in 
various fora in the Dominican Republic.  On March 8 President 
Mejia, accompanied by the First Lady, the Vice President and 
the Secretary for Women, presided over an elaborate ceremony 
at the National Palace to present 24 women with merit awards 
for being champions of issues affecting women and for being 
role models.  Almost all cabinet-level ministries were 
represented along with a strong diplomatic corps presence. 
In a more subdued event, women representing more than 20 
civil society organizations peacefully marched to the Palace 
of Justice to deliver a petition against domestic violence. 
To date this year at least eight women have died at the hands 
of a lover or spouse.  On March 9 Charge d\'Affaires hosted a 
cocktail for more than 100 prominent Dominican women from the 
business sector, government and civil society in 
acknowledgment of their achievements and camaraderie with the 
Mission.  End Summary. 
 
PRESIDENT HONORS WOMEN 
 
2. On March 8 President Mejia, in the company of the First 
Lady, the Vice President and the Secretary for Women, 
presided over an elaborate ceremony at the National Palace in 
honor of International Women\'s Day.  Among the 24 recipients 
of merit awards, leaders of two women\'s NGOs were recognized: 
the founders of Dominican Feminist Action and the organizer 
of the Federation for Peasant Women.  Other recipients 
included women involved in politics, academia and the arts. 
The Secretary of Women gave a 35-minute speech praising 
women\'s accomplishments and the administration\'s record on 
women\'s issues.  She cited the laws affecting women that have 
been passed under the Mejia administration, including a Law 
Against Trafficking and Alien Smuggling, a law that 
establishes safe havens for victims of domestic violence and 
a decreee which establishes an Office for Equity, Gender and 
Development in each ministry. 
 
CHARGE HOSTS COCKTAIL FOR WOMEN 
 
3. On March 9 Charge d\'Affaires hosted a cocktail for more 
than 100 prominent women representing the government, civil 
society and the business sector.  Prominent guests included 
the Vice President and Secretary for Education Milagros Ortiz 
Bosch and the President\'s sister Chavela Grullon, President 
of the National Council for Children and Adolescents (CONANI) 
and Congresswoman Minou Tavares Mirabal.  Borrowing themes 
from the Secretary\'s message (reftel), Charge praised 
Dominican women \"who are working every day to improve the 
lives of all Dominicans in the areas of education, health and 
human rights, and women who are fighting scourges like 
trafficking and HIV/AIDS.\"  Charge also acknowledged the 
significance of November 25, UN International Day for the 
Elimination of Violence Against Women, established in memory 
of the Dominican Republic\'s Mirabal sisters who helped lead 
the movement to bring down the Trujillo dictatorship. 
 
A DAY OF REFLECTION AND PEACEFUL MARCHES 
 
4. International Women\'s Day was also a time to reflect on 
social issues as well as the effects of current economic 
conditions.  Several women\'s NGOs marched to the Palace of 
Justice to deliver a petition against domestic violence. 
Women also marched to Independence Park in Santo Domingo, 
where civil society activists offered their views on the 
state of affairs affecting women.  According to newspaper 
reports, some women are giving their children tea as a 
cheaper alternative to milk.  NGOs lament that women have cut 
back on food portions for their children because they can no 
longer afford to purchase larger quantities.  The groups 
called on the President to take responsibility for the 
economic policies that have caused a deteriorating quality of 
life for the general populace and particularly for women. 
 
COMMENT 
 
5. (SBU) International Women\'s Day received substantial 
coverage in the press.  The contrast in celebrations is 
telling; President Mejia wants to put his stamp in the 
history books for passing key legislation to advance women\'s 
rights while civil society criticizes him for women\'s 
economic woes.  The press says that last year was more 
violent for women than previous years, with estimates that 
more than 40 per cent of women and children were victims of 
domestic violence.  This is the reality against which the new 
law against trafficking and the law establishing safe havens 
are aimed, in hopes of fostering better conditions for women 
and reducing the obstacles and demeaning treatment they 
confront. 
KUBISKE 
"
"14949","3/15/2004 11:10","04SANTODOMINGO1696","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 001696 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, DR 
SUBJECT: GODR PRESIDENT MEJIA PUBLICLY DENIES AIDING 
HAITIAN REBELS 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 
 
 1. (U) President Mejia commented extensively on March 11 to 
a journalist from Hoy newspaper, a respected daily in Santo 
Domingo, Dominican Republic. insisting that the GODR was not 
involved in helping Haitian rebels in any manner. 
 
2. (U) Begin unofficial translation: 
 
MEJIA DENIES SUPPORTING REBELS IN HAITI 
 
President Hipolito Mejia yesterday denied rumors that are 
circulating among diplomats and in the U.S. Congress that the 
Dominican government is supporting the Haitian rebels that 
rose up against President Jean Bertrand Aristide. 
 
\"I want to take this opportunity to say that we, in regard to 
the Haitian conflict, have shown great respect for the 
(Haitian) people, the government, society and the dignity of 
the Haitians,\" assured President Mejia. 
 
\"We have not provoked nor thrown fuel on the fire of this 
environment already charged with conflict, nor (have we) 
supported them with weapons that have lead to deaths, nor 
(have we) given them any other type of support,\" said the 
President, on his own initiative, during a ceremony honoring 
a Puerto Rican priest, Rafael Candelas Morales, for his many 
years of residency in the country. 
 
\"We have maintained good control (over the crisis in Haiti) 
in order to avoid any misunderstanding,\" said Mejia, who also 
mentioned that the Dominican Republic has been complimented 
for not having been \"opposed\" to the deteriorating situation 
of the neighboring state. He didn\'t say who offered their 
compliments. 
 
\"We ask God to help that country (Haiti) to leave behind its 
worries, the overwhelmingly grave problems that it has,\" 
added Mejia at the ceremony that took place in his office. 
 
In diplomatic and media circles there has been speculation 
about the supposed backing (of Haitian rebels), including the 
presumed arms supply to a leader of a group headed by the 
former Haitian police director, Guy Philippe, who stated that 
he entered Haiti by crossing the Dominican border. 
 
More recently, Congressman Donald Payne, Democrat from New 
Jersey, requested the government of the United States to 
explain why it had sold 3,500 guns to the Dominican Republic, 
believing that this country (Dominican Republic) is the place 
where the former Haitian paramilitary leaders organized their 
rebellion against the Aristide government. 
 
The Secretary of Dominican Armed Forces, Lt. Gen. Jose Miguel 
Soto Jimenez, denied that arms were purchased. 
 
Mejia identified with a phrase used by the deposed President 
Aristide and said that Haiti and the Dominican Republic \"are 
two wings of the same bird,\" but he emphasized that, \"much of 
the mischief that our Haitian brothers make (in Haiti), we 
must understand and accept,\" an obvious allusion to the 
political instability. \"I have said that we are a marriage 
without a divorce,\" said the leader. 
 
Manuel Jimenez, Editor of Hoy. 
 
(End of unofficial translation.) 
KUBISKE 
"
"14950","3/15/2004 11:10","04SANTODOMINGO1697","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO1319|04SANTODOMINGO1518|04STATE52515","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 001697 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION #27: CAMPAIGNING, LOGISTICS AND 
A VIGIL FOR LEONEL\'S VP CANDIDATE 
 
REF: A. (A) SANTO DOMINGO 1518 
     B. (B) STATE 52515 (NOTAL) 
     C. (C) SANTO DOMINGO 1319 
 
1. (SBU) This is no. 27 in our series on the Dominican 
presidential election: 
 
ELECTION CAMPAIGNING, LOGISTICS AND A VIGIL FOR LEONEL\'S VP 
CANDIDATE 
 
After Rafael \"Fello\" Subervi accepted President Mejia\'s offer 
of the vice presidential slot (Ref A), the ruling PRD mounted 
a rally of thousands with both candidates March 7 to 
celebrate the birthday of late PRD leader Jose Francisco Pena 
Gomez (our SIPRNET site carries Mejia\'s tub-thumper of a 
rally speech).  Subervi told second-ranked daily HOY, \"The 
PRD is 95 percent united\" and can count on its 1.7 million 
members to carry Mejia/Subervi to victory.  He acknowledged 
he had \"discussed\" government jobs for his supporters with 
party president Vicente Sanchez Baret before accepting the 
second slot on the ticket. Mejia accused chief adversary and 
former president Leonel Fernandez (PLD) of \"treason\" for his 
March 2 statements in Washington warning of an impending 
electoral fraud (Ref B). 
 
Reacting to this and other PRD smear tactics (Ref C), church 
and civic organizations and the Central Election Board (JCE) 
have been advocating a higher level of campaign discourse. 
USAID-funded NGO \"Participacion Ciudadana\" (Citizens\' 
Participation) on March 9 proposed in leading newspapers a 
16-point code of ethics for the election campaign, advocating 
\"an atmosphere conducive to debate and discussion of 
programs, ideas and themes important to the nation, without 
attacks or personal diatribes.\" 
 
Mejia\'s camp expressed mild interest in holding televised 
presidential candidate debates -- unprecedented here -- but 
PLD Secretary General Reinaldo Pared Perez sneered at the 
idea.  The PLD SecGen said the President \"doesn\'t meet the 
necessary conditions for a debate\" since he is below 20 
percent in the polls and PLD candidate and former president 
Leonel Fernandez is above 60.  Fernandez instead on March 8 
began running nightly on prime time television a 
docu-advertisement of \"conversations with constituents.\" 
PRSC candidate Eduardo Estrella -- as far down in the polls 
as Mejia -- has shown no interest in a debate, but in recent 
days appeared at a civic forum on corruption, where he 
promised tighter economic austerity and tough anti-corruption 
measures.  None of the candidates has published an election 
platform. 
 
Traditional caravans and marches are accelerating, and the 
first violence occurred March 7 in an incident that left four 
injured.  Campaign directors met March 8 and agreed to 
exchange itineraries for street rallies, so as to avoid 
partisan confrontations.  The three contenders and two minor 
party condidates planned an intense campaign schedule March 
13-14 in the provinces and the capital.  President Mejia 
plans to hit Barahona in the impoverished southwest for the 
inauguration of more public works. 
 
Counting, Registering and Preparing 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
Central Election Board (JCE) judges and technical directors 
on March 4 held a public briefing for diplomats, journalists, 
and political party representatives on logistics and data 
processing arrangements.  The event afforded detailed 
information on the election preparations, but did not allay 
the opposition\'s distrust of the JCE as a Mejia-packed court. 
 The briefers reported a total of 5,020,703 eligible 
registered voters, of whom 52,440 will vote in overseas 
locations in the United States, Canada, Spain, and Venezuela 
(a first for the Dominican Republic).  Voters will cast 
ballots at 12,102 \"colegios electorales\" (polling tables) at 
home and abroad; handwritten tallies will be scanned into the 
computer system at 134 municipal election boards and overseas 
sites and transmitted by dedicated telephone lines to the JCE 
computer center in  Santo Domingo.  The JCE said it was 
adhering to its published timetable and had recruited and 
begun training 82 percent of the needed 66,561 volunteer poll 
workers. 
 
USAID-funded NGO Participacion Ciudadana (Citizen 
Participation) gave a lunch for diplomats and the press March 
3 to outline its plans for 6,000 Dominican election observers 
and to offer an independent assessment of the election 
arrangements.  The Monitoring Commission of notables chaired 
by Mons. Agripino Nunez conferred with \"Mini-Dublin-Group\" 
diplomats (including poloff) March 2 to exchange views and 
concerns, from defects in voter rolls to security shortfalls 
in the JCE\'s computer system.  A committee of information 
systems advisers to the JCE on March 10 delivered a report 
critical of computer security and recommended an outside 
audit; a copy quickly leaked to the press.  JCE president 
Luis Arias replied that the computer and voter list problems 
were well known to the JCE\'s experts and were being resolved. 
 The JCE earlier had announced that polling places will be 
open April 17-18, well in advance of the election, for voters 
to verify that their registrations are correct. 
 
Nerves 
- - - - 
 
Civil society, business, and the opposition continue to call 
for maximum vigilance by national and international 
observers, to safeguard against rumored abuses in support of 
the President\'s re-election bid.  Some contacts ask us, \"Why 
is the United States less supportive of election observers 
than in previous elections?\"  This comes mainly from 
Fernandez\'s PLD, the National Council of Private Enterprise 
(CONEP), and other business groups.  We have taken every 
opportunity to correct this misperception, for example in a 
private briefing for the American Chamber of Commerce board 
March 5.  PLD leaders and members of Participacion Ciudadana 
told the press on March 11 of their concern that 
international monitoring might be inadequate.  They exhorted 
the JCE to get additional qualified international groups 
involved.  JCE Administrative Chamber presiding judge Nelson 
Gomez, at the March 4 briefing and in a subsequent TV 
interview, urged international observers -- including 
diplomats -- to begin their activities as soon as possible. 
 
Inexorable Movement of Preparations 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
The JCE announced it would distribute RD $412.8 million (US 
$8.4 million) in public campaign financing to the registered 
political parties March 28, of which RD $304 million (US 
$6.2) would go to the three big parties.  The JCE approved 
additional political party alliances (small hangers-on 
casting their lot with Mejia or Fernandez) and resolved 
disputes within two small parties, invalidating their 
proposed alliances with the ruling PRD.  Army Major General 
Elvio Guerrero Reyes, recently named to head the Electoral 
Police to provide polling site security before and on 
election day, announced that the JCE from March 25 to 31 
would train Armed Forces and National Police officers for 
this duty.  The Electoral Police will have a total contingent 
of 35,000 military and police personnel. 
 
The VP sweepstakes 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
This weekend\'s cliffhanger is Leonel\'s choice of a vice 
presidential candidate, scheduled to go public before the 
March 17 deadline for registering candidates.  Pundits have 
happily been pouring out names of possible running mates, 
including business leaders as well as politicians.  The other 
PLD chieftains Danilo Medina (PLD candidate in 2000) and 
Jaime David Fernandez (VP in 1996-2000) Jaime David Fernandez 
Mirabal seem unlikely choices. Medina has been more effective 
as a behind-the-scenes organizer than in public, and Jaime 
David probably is biding his time for a future presidential 
bid. Party organs will meet Sunday to recommend a candidate, 
but the final choice will be up to Leonel. 
 
2. (U)  Drafted by Bain Cowell. 
 
3. (U)  This report and others in our election series are 
available on the Department\'s SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/  along with 
other current material. 
KUBISKE 
"
"14959","3/15/2004 14:00","04SANTODOMINGO1703","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 001703 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB - SUSAN WILSON; USDOC PASS LOC FOR COPYRIGHT 
OFFICE 
USDOC FOR USPTO - LOIS BOLAND 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, ETRD, KIPR, EINV 
SUBJECT: NEW DOMINICAN REGULATIONS ON BROADCASTING AND IPR 
 
 
1. A special supplement March 12 in the HOY newspaper 
publishes for public comment (30 days) Resolution 029-04, a 
comprehensive set of regulations governing TV services and 
licensing of broadcasters.  Most of the supplement is very 
technical, but of note is Chapter 1, Article 2.1: (unofficial 
translation) \"Television broadcasting services will be 
regulated insofar as concerns content, information, 
programming, advertising, copyright, intellectual property 
and other aspects of social communication, according to the 
norms of domestic law resulting from international treaties 
or agreements signed and ratified by the Dominican Republic.\" 
Text of the full draft resolution can be found on INDOTEL\'s 
website, www.indotel.org.do. 
KUBISKE 
"
"14995","3/16/2004 12:31","04SANTODOMINGO1723","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO171","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 001723 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: (CORRECTED COPY) DOMINICAN ELECTIONS NO. 28: 
RUNNING PAST ONE ANOTHER 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 0171 
 
1. (SBU) This is the 28th in our series on the Dominican 
presidential elections: 
 
Election Series #28: 
 
Running Past One Another: Styles of the Leading Candidates 
 
There will almost certainly be no debate between Hipolito 
Mejia and Leonel Fernandez, even though civic organizations 
and commentators seized upon the Ambassador\'s February 25 
proposal.  Caught by journalists after a ceremony, Mejia said 
he would \"consider\" the idea.  PLD Secretary General Reynaldo 
Pared Perez said that Fernandez wouldn,t think of debating 
someone with less than 20 percent support (spiking Mejia with 
the very gibe Mejia used in a dismissive reference to \"that 
ex-president with 18 or 20 points\" in February 2002). 
 
Fernandez, with more than 60 percent in polls since late 
2003, has no reason to take the risk of a direct 
confrontation.  The styles of the two candidates are entirely 
different.  And an encounter between Mejia and Fernandez 
would not be a debate in the usual sense.  It would be closer 
to a verbal mugging of Fernandez than a discussion of 
substance. 
 
The Farmer from Gurabo 
 
Hipolito Mejia is caustic, jocular, colloquial and direct. 
His target is the average Dominican - - farmers, shopkeepers, 
laborers, and the unemployed. Mejia is smart but not 
particularly well educated or focused in his discourse.  He 
and his faction of the PRD are strongest outside the cities. 
Mejia campaigns by going to the provinces to deliver public 
works - - in late 2003 he showed the Ambassador a thick 
binder of small projects stopped for lack of funds.  The 
December and January disbursements from the InterAmerican 
Development Bank and World Bank provided the money for the 
administration to finish many of these, at least to a point 
where they could be inaugurated.  At these events Mejia 
appears in the crowds, outdoors, wearing a guayabera shirt 
and often a straw hat, looking very much like a farmer. 
Mejia has largely united the party after the fights over 
re-election and leadership, and he is playing to place 
strongly enough to deprive Fernandez of a majority and push 
the election into a second round. 
 
Mejia,s language is vigorous and colorful - - so remarkable 
that it is the subject to a new academic study: \"The 
Colloquial Speech of Hipolito Mejia: Study of an Idiolect.\" 
Most of the 248-page book is devoted to vocabulary and 
expressions from Mejia,s public utterances, analyzed in 
context, meaning, significance and style.  The listing begins 
in 1999 with a transcription of candidate Mejia,s own 
explanation of the colloquialism, \"I,ve got him by the 
pichirri\": 
 
 \"The pichirri is the part, the spot where you grab a hen or 
a rooster - - if you press on it there, you dominate it 
entirely, so then, referring to a candidate like him (the 
PLD,s Danilo Medina) who is not the only one out there, 
since Dr. Balaguer is there and you can,t grab him by the 
 pichirri, since he,s a smart man - - definitely though, 
as for this gentleman (Medina), I have him by the pichirri, 
because he can,t budge.\"  (An anecdote not in the book: 
when journalists threw the expression at Fernandez, who grew 
up in New York, they got a blank look: \"What is a pichirri?\") 
 
Mejia,s invective has often been directed at Fernandez and 
at his PLD \"comesolos\" (selfish, exclusive enjoyers of 
privilege who dine alone).  Mejia aggressively projects tubby 
manliness (hombria) and dismisses Fernandez as ineffectual 
and even effeminate.  His style, says one editor, is the 
\"politics of cockfighting, of machos who impose themselves at 
any cost, with lethal barbs and spurs.\" Last October after an 
interview with international news channel Univisin, the 
cameras, still rolling, caught Mejia making crude jokes about 
Fernandez,s sexuality.  And Mejia hammers away, calling the 
PLD privileged moneyed \"little gentlemen\" (senoritos) out to 
exploit the country for themselves.  Mejia now appears every 
Sunday evening on the interview program \"Una Vez a la 
Semana\"8 on a government channel, expostulating in a style 
summarized on March 15 by El Caribe newspaper: \"Once again he 
slammed into speculators and his PLD opponent Leonel 
Fernandez, reminding viewers that Fernandez worked and got 
paid by one of the banks that failed in the financial sector. 
 In the style customary for his public comments, the 
President,s declarations leaped from one theme to another 
without stopping to explain details.\" 
 
 In short, Mejia is pugnacious, unpredictable and emotive, a 
larger than life caricature of the common Dominican man -- in 
media terms, \"hot.\" 
 
The Foundation Man 
 
Leonel Fernandez raises excitement at meetings across the 
country but more for his aura of the coming conqueror than 
for his personal style or presence.  Since leaving office in 
2000 Fernandez has presided over the Global Foundation for 
Economic Development (see www.funglode.org), a vehicle 
endowed for him by wealthy supporters.  He has traveled 
widely and participated in many ceremonial and academic 
events in the United States and in Europe.  Fernandez is the 
man in the suit, with a thoughtful look on his face and a 
grimace of concern at the plight of the country. 
 
The PLD is marketing Fernandez with lots of display media 
(\"Leonel is coming back!\" with smiling picture, purple 
background evoking the PLD colors and a Dominican flag - - 
used so frequently that PRD grumblers write about 
inappropriate exploitation of national symbols).  This past 
week the PLD was running an hour-long docu-program on 
national television at least once a day.  Fernandez is 
sitting on the verandah of a clearly upper class residence, 
conducting \"town meeting\" style Qs and As with twenty or so 
concerned Dominicans.  The scene could be in Spain, except 
for the Dominican accents - - all the attentive participants, 
men and women, are white professionals in a mixed-race 
population.  The only glimpse of a dark face is that of a 
waiter in a white jacket disappearing through a doorway. 
Fernandez, the most criollo-looking one on screen, speaks 
quietly, fluently and in polysyllables of re-establishing 
business confidence to attract flight capital back to the 
country, tax reform, the quasi-fiscal deficit, debt 
renegotiation, seeking international assistance for Haiti, 
moving toward higher value-added in manufacturing, enforcing 
migration laws, using the U.S. \"third border\" initiative to 
exploit the country,s strategic position, the curative and 
preventive functions of national health policy, strengthening 
the judiciary, re-privatization of electricity distribution 
companies, investing in public works, stabilizing the 
exchange rate, and the need for quality leadership, vision, 
and a frank dialogue on the medium and long term.  In other 
words, Fernandez is a pat, well-spoken policy wonk, cozy with 
the well off. He mentions Mejia,s administration almost with 
regret, with passing comments about \"irresponsible\" fiscal 
policy, media manipulation and \"confusion\" in leadership. 
Fernandez has no surprising ideas but he doesn,t make any 
clearly unachievable promises, either.  In media terms his is 
a \"cool\" presence. 
 
The docu-program breaks three times to present the same two 
very slick one-minute political ads.  The first shows 
cartoonish vignettes of economic distress with live actors 
and special effects, with close-ups of Leonel showing silent 
concern.  The second is a lively basketball game where the 
white-jerseyed \"Nation\" is losing badly to the black-jerseyed 
\"Crisis\" team, which is using fouls and intimidation - - 
until Leonel comes striding into the gym (assured, contained 
and in a suit) to coach the \"Nation\" back to victory.  This 
is a funny, fast and appealing spot - - and on screen the 
cheering fans, loving it, actually look Dominican. 
 
Neither candidate has yet published a campaign platform. 
 
The Puzzle of the Polls 
 
Polls in October, January and February consistently showed 
Fernandez with better than 60 percent of the prospective 
vote.  In our view those votes are not solidly Leonel,s - - 
many of them are votes for \"anything but this current 
economic misery.\"  Fernandez will need to work hard to keep a 
convincing lead, since Mejia now has sufficient international 
funding to keep the electricity sector going and to splash 
out modest but numerous public works projects.  Mejia is 
directing all his effort to winning back the man in the 
street and the family in the countryside, the traditional 
supporters of the PRD.  On March 14 Mejia asserted that the 
PRD had regained the lead in 20 of 22 provinces.  If the 
election goes to a second round, Mejia will have an 
additional 45 days to assemble a coalition -- probably 
including elements of the third big party, the PRSC. 
 
At this point it looks like about an even chance for Leonel 
to win outright on May 16.  He has not been very effective or 
directed in communicating the message that even for the 
PRD,s base he offers better hopes than Mejia does.  Leonel 
hasn,t yet got Mejia by the pichirri. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Michael Meigs. 
 
3. (U)  This report and the rest of our elections series are 
available on our SIPRNET site 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/  along with 
other material. 
 
KUBISKE 
"
"15160","3/19/2004 18:47","04SANTODOMINGO1816","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO6970","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 001816 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR CA MAURA HARTY, CA/PPT ANN BARRETT, CA/PPT/PAS 
JOHN HOTCHNER AND MARCO TEDESCO, CA/FPP FRANK TURLEY, 
G/TIP, INL, WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: CMGT, CPAS, CVIS, CASC, KFRD, DR 
SUBJECT:  MEETING WITH GODR OFFICIALS ON STATUS OF NEW 
DOMINICAN PASSPORT AND NEW PASSPORT ANTI-FRAUD UNIT 
 
REF:  SANTO DOMINGO 006970 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED, PLEASE PROTECT ACCORDINGLY 
 
1. (U) SUMMARY:  GODR is still on track to produce ICAO 
compliant passport in April.  GODR Passport Office has 
established new Anti-Fraud Unit. END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (U) On March 9, 2004 Consul General and FPM met 
with Director of GODR Passport Office, Mr. Elias Wessin 
Chavez. Purpose of the meeting was to find out the 
status of a proposed ICAO compliant Dominican passport. 
Reftel stated that new Dominican passport was expected 
to be ready by April, 2004. 
 
3. (U) Chavez is holding to the original deadline of 
April, at which time he said that at least the Central 
Passport Office in Santo Domingo would be producing the 
new Dominican passport.  On the day of our meeting, 
Chavez reported that there were some problems in 
Dominican Customs with release of the passport printing 
hardware shipped from Germany.  Once it is released, he 
said, it will be installed in all twelve passport 
agencies, which are already networked.  Passport 
authorization, however, will only be done by the 
Central Passport Office in Santo Domingo.  The only 
serious infrastructure problem Chavez envisions is the 
lack of dependability of electricity.  He has planned 
on buying generators for each office. 
 
4. (U) Chavez mentioned that this first year is 
considered a transition phase after which the new 
operation will be replicated for official and 
diplomatic passports, and Dominican visas 
responsibility for which comes under the Office of 
Consular Affairs, headed by Ambassador Dulce Rosario de 
la Maza. 
 
5. (U) Chavez emphasized that not only will the GODR be 
producing a new ICAO compliant passport, it will be 
implementing a new approach to the passport 
application, adjudication, and issuance process. He 
said that he did not want the passport office to be 
seen as a \"passport factory\" where you can get a 
passport as long as you have paid your money.  Instead, 
he said that the process will be under more control and 
that applicants will have to prove their eligibility 
for a passport.  He is, therefore, implementing the 
following anti-fraud measures: 
(1) Payment for passports will be through the Banco de 
Reservas and applicants will bring their payment 
receipts to the passport office.  This is to separate 
the handling of cash from the actual passport 
adjudication and issuance process. (2) Burning all the 
blank old Dominican passport books that will become 
obsolete with the issuance of the new passport. 
 
Most important, however, was Chavez\'s announcement the 
week previous to our meeting that he had established a 
Passport Office Anti-Fraud Unit with fraud prevention 
as its mission.  This unit is staffed by both lawyers 
and police officers.  The latter bring technical 
expertise in fraud practices.  Chavez stated that they 
have already submitted thirty-five cases of fraud to 
the justice system.  The FPM and FPU staff had been 
invited the week before to attend an anti-fraud 
training workshop sponsored on four consecutive 
Saturdays for GODR Passport Office employees country- 
wide.  FPM and staff attended the inauguration of the 
workshop on March 6.  There were more than 100 
participants from the entire country and they displayed 
a high degree of interest and enthusiasm for the 
concept of \"fraud prevention\". 
 
During our meeting, Chavez requested training from the 
Consulate to which we agreed.  He also hinted at a 
request for forensic lab equipment to which we did not 
commit.  He promised to give us samples of the new 
Dominican passport as soon as they are ready. 
 
6. (U) Dominican presidential elections are to take 
place on May 16, 2004. When we asked Chavez what would 
happen to his efforts after that date, he responded 
that no matter who followed him, he believed that this 
new passport system would survive since it would be 
something that could really not be dismantled easily. 
He also mentioned that he had been invited to the ICAO 
Conference on May 17, 2004 but because of the elections 
was unsure whether he would attend. 
 
7. (U) Embassy will continue to follow the progress of 
the new Dominican passport and report as developments 
occur. 
 
HERTELL 
"
"15170","3/19/2004 21:08","04SANTODOMINGO1823","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO1697","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 001823 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/PPC, AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION #29: LEONEL\'S V.P. - LOW KEY 
AND PLD 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 1697 
 
1. (SBU) This is no. 29 in our series on the Dominican 
presidential election: 
 
LEONEL\'S V.P. - LOW KEY AND PLD 
 
Leonel Fernandez\'s March 16 announcement that Rafael 
Albuquerque would be his vice-presidential running mate 
surprised nearly everyone.  It could prove to be an astute 
choice.  The patrician Alburquerque, former secretary of 
state for labor and a long-time member of the PLD, also 
served in a PRSC administration and is a respected expert in 
labor law.  Fernandez deliberately passed over more powerful 
PLD figures expected to compete for the party\'s presidential 
nomination in 2008, including former candidate Danilo Medina 
and former Vice President Jaime David Fernandez Mirabal. 
Albuquerque is low key, regarded as honest and capable.  He 
is likely to play a solid second fiddle to concertmaster 
Leonel, with no dissonances.  Typical comment around here: 
\"He won\'t add many votes, but will alienate none.\" 
 
Fernandez waited until 6 pm on the final day before 
candidacies had to be declared.  Many believed that he would 
announced PRSC veteran Carlos Morales Troncoso.  Common 
wisdom that Morales Troncoso would serve somehow as a 
\"bridge\" to Washington; when Morales Troncoso didn\'t make the 
cut, common wisdom reversed itself to declare that Washington 
hadn\'t found Morales Troncoso acceptable.  Morales told the 
papers that yes, Leonel had offered him the post and he had 
simply turned it down. 
 
Rafael Alburquerque served as PRSC President Balaguer\'s labor 
secretary, 1991-96, and continued with that portfolio in the 
 
SIPDIS 
Fernandez administration until 2000.  He was one of three 
authors of the current Dominican labor code, enacted in 1992, 
and during his nine years in the cabinet established a 
reputation for integrity and moderation.  Respected Catholic 
University (PUCMM) dean Flavio Dario Espinal writes, 
\"Alburquerque has the best credentials to help in processes 
of mediation and negotiation of social conflicts, and to 
strengthen the government\'s capacity to communicate with the 
common people generally.\"  This could come in handy; the 
currently ruling PRD if in opposition might mobilize its 
militants and affiliated unions to promote strikes as it did 
during the previous Fernandez administration.  Albuquerque 
has cordial relations with most political leaders. 
 
Born June 14, 1940, Alburquerque was a founding member of the 
Dominican Students Federation and the PLD.  In the 1978 and 
1982 elections, he served as number two on PLD founder Juan 
Bosch\'s ticket, but the irascible Bosch later expelled himv 
from the party.  Alburquerque established his own Party of 
the Dominican People (PPD), and in the 1996 election gave his 
support to the National Patriotic Front which carried Leonel 
Fernandez (PLD) to the presidency. 
 
Alburquerque has four decades\' experience as a labor lawyer 
and law professor and has authored several books in the 
field.  He received a doctorate in law from the University of 
Paris in 1965.  In 1988, he went to the United States as an 
international visitor (IV) grantee. 
 
2, (U) Drafted by Bainbridge Cowell. 
 
3. (U) This report and the rest of our electoral series are 
on the SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/  along with 
exte 
"
"15220","3/22/2004 18:03","04SANTODOMINGO1835","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO1823","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 001835 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA-FRIEDMAN, WHA/CAR, WHA/PPC, WHA/USOAS, AND DRL 
STATE PASS AID 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PREL, IO, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION #30: OAS LAUNCHES OBSERVER 
MISSION 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 1823 
 
1. (SBU) This is No. 30 in our series on the Dominican 
presidential election: 
 
OAS LAUNCHES ELECTION OBERVER MISSION 
 
Senior advisor Santiago Murray kicked off the U.S.-funded 
Organization of American States (OAS) election observation 
mission during a March 15-19 visit to Santo Domingo.  Murray 
serves in the OAS Unit for Promotion of Democracy.  An 
Argentine, he has observed elections in 10 Latin American 
countries over the past decade, including the Dominican 
presidential contests in 2000 and 1996.  The press played up 
his consultations with the Central Election Board (JCE) and 
President Mejia.  Murray met the main opposition candidates, 
the USAID-funded NGO \"Citizen Participation,\" the Monitoring 
Commission of civic notables, and diplomats.  He gave the 
Ambassador an account of his week. 
 
Murray\'s visit toned down complaints that OAS observers would 
be inadequate or that the international community (read USG) 
would provide insufficient support.  Hours after Murray\'s 
March 19 departure, the Ambassador announced $325,000 for the 
OAS effort during his speech at the Foreign Secretariat\'s 
Diplomatic School.  Government-owned daily \"Listin Diario\" 
headlined this contribution in its report of the speech, 
which was mainly devoted to other issues (septel). 
 
The U.S. contribution encouraged other donors. EU Ambassador 
Miguel Amado learned of it from the Ambassador at a March 17 
lunch for Murray offered by the Spanish ambassador and 
offered an additional 80,000 euros (100,000 USD) from his 
locally available assistance funds.  Canadian Ambassador Adam 
Blackwell at his March 17 reception for Murray make public a 
promise of RD $1.5 million (31,000 USD) to upgrade equipment 
at the OAS office here that will serve as the observer 
mission\'s headquarters. 
 
In his 30-minute meeting with President Mejia, Murray 
reported widespread concerns that Mejia\'s ruling PRD might 
attempt election fraud and that the President was using 
government resources for campaign purposes.  Mejia flatly 
denied both allegations and offered \"full guarantees and 
security\" that there would be no electoral irregularities. 
He emphasized that he was campaigning with personal vehicles 
and other non-GODR resources.  Murray was clear: if any such 
abuses are verified during the election process and not 
corrected, the OAS mission will speak out. 
 
This came in a week when, almost daily, Mejia showed up in 
different provinces cutting ribbons on public works projects, 
from irrigation systems to housing.  In the province of Azua 
alone, the works were valued at RD $2 billion (40 million 
USD).  Mejia told the press March 14 he had visited 22 of the 
nation\'s 29 provinces since the start of the campaign and 
claimed to be \"ahead of my adversaries\" in 20 of them.  Most 
of these visits featured highly publicized inaugurations of 
local public works. 
 
In his call on the Ambassador March 18 Murray praised U.S. 
support of his mission. The Ambassador reiterated the offer 
of any appropriate Embassy assistance to the mission.  Murray 
assured us he would coordinate with any qualified 
international NGOs that might send observers, regardless of 
their funding soruces, and with the Embassy throughout the 
election process.  He raised the possibility that OAS SecGen 
Gaviria might visit on election day.  Murray expects the 
political atmosphere to get \"tougher\" in coming weeks, with 
the theme of low public confidence in the process, alleged 
partisan bias of the Central Election Board (JCE) and the 
controversy associated with Mejia\'s re-election bid, . 
 
Murray plans to return for a week in mid-April with a team of 
three technical experts (on computers, election logistics, 
and legal aspects). The OAS will establish eight 
international observers in different regions of the country. 
In early May, he will return and gradually build up to a team 
of 25 international observers.  All will stay through 
election day and four orfive days afterward to cover the vote 
count and any disputes.  The OAS will conduct a \"quick count\" 
at the close of the polls and provide the results to the 
election authorities, 
 
Earlier, Murray met at the Embassy with mid-level diplomats 
from 11 embassies and the UN and OAS offices here. Four more 
embassies were interested but could not attend, and we will 
keep them informed.  Murray outlined his proposal to organize 
a group of diplomats to work as election observers on May 16 
in coordination with the OAS mission.  Murray said the OAS 
would send a formal invitation to all the missions to solicit 
from their staffs mid-level volunteers for election observer 
duty.  Participants agreed agreed that upon receipt of the 
invitations, the volunteers will send their c.v.\'s to OAS 
Resident Representative Bertha Santoscoy. The OAS will 
arrange for observer credentials to be issued by the JCE. 
Murray committed to meet again with the diplomats and to 
conduct technical orientation for them. 
 
2. (U)  Drafted by Bain Cowell. 
 
3. (U)  This report and others in our election series are 
available on the SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ index.cfm along 
with extensive other material. 
HERTELL 
"
"15269","3/23/2004 17:36","04SANTODOMINGO1866","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 001866 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/CAR/MCISAAC AND EB/IFD/OMA/WONG; 
NSC FOR HCRUZ; 
TREASURY FOR OIASA/LEE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC MOSTLY ON TRACK TO MEET IMF 
MARCH PERFORMANCE CRITERIA 
 
 
------------------- 
Summary and Comment 
------------------- 
 
1.  (SBU) The GODR will likely meet International Monetary 
Fund fiscal targets for March, but faces difficulty meeting 
the target for reductions in the monetary base, according to 
the IMF\'s local representative March 19.  IMF Mission\'s 
recent visit to Santo Domingo was brief and confirmed GODR 
leadership\'s commitment to the IMF program.  Comment: With 
the help of the IMF program, the economy is showing some 
improvement - a strengthened peso that perhaps reflects some 
boost in confidence, increased solvency in the banking 
sector, and continued good performance of exports and 
tourism.  Pressure on the government to keep within budgetary 
targets will continue to be fierce during this presidential 
campaign season that concludes wither May 16 (assuming a 
first-round victory) or June 30 (if a second round is 
needed).  End summary and comment. 
 
----------------------- 
Fiscal Targets on Track 
----------------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) According to International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
Representative Ousmene Mandeng, the GODR will likely meet its 
March fiscal targets under the revised IMF Standby Agreement 
approved in February.  During a March 19 meeting with 
Econoff, Mandeng said that GODR expenditures are slightly 
below program level, and revenues are better than expected. 
Mandeng cautioned that the recent spike in inflation -- 
cumulatively around 20 percent for the first two months of 
the year -- and \"off-budget\" expenditures contributed to some 
uncertainty.  He explained that there had been an increase in 
GODR projects financed externally that were not included in 
the budget and said that he was unsure about the impact of 
those projects on the fiscal accounting. 
 
3.  (SBU) Mandeng said that he was in frequent contact with 
the GODR budget director and members of the economic team and 
was reassured by their apparent continuing commitment to the 
program.  He reported that an IMF team met with senior GODR 
officials during the team\'s March 11-12 visit to the 
Dominican Republic and that the Government was clear about 
its intent to meet the performance criteria. 
 
 
------------------------------- 
Monetary Target Needs More Work 
------------------------------- 
 
4.  (SBU)  Mandeng said the GODR would likely miss \"by eight 
or nine billion pesos\" the RD67.5 billion target for 
reduction of the monetary base   He suggested that in light 
of solid GODR efforts, missing that target might not be too 
serious of a problem from the Fund\'s perspective, but would 
be a negative signal for other observers.  Mandeng said if 
GODR did not meet the March performance criteria, the Fund 
would probably not issue any statement until after the next 
review, scheduled for May, potentially leading to negative 
speculation about the GODR\'s performance. 
 
5.  (SBU) Mandeng suggested steps the GODR could still take 
to meet the monetary target.  First, as an accounting 
measure, the Central Bank could transfer bank reserves to 
long-term CD\'s.  The Central Bank would also need to raise 
bank legal reserve requirements at the same time.  The 
problem with this proposal, Mandeng noted, is that there is 
asymmetry in bank liquidity and no interbank borrowing 
facilities.  Some banks could meet increased reserve 
requirements, but others would not be able to.  The liquidity 
issue, he said, essentially eliminated this as a policy 
option. 
 
6.  (SBU) An alternative to raising bank legal reserves would 
be for the Central Bank to convince exporters to purchase 
peso certificates, thereby sterilizing their sales of 
dollars.  However, there does not appear to be sufficient 
market for Central Bank certificates, which are 
undersubscribed even at a short-term rate of 59 percent. 
Mandeng also suggested that the government could transfer its 
deposits in government-owned Banco de Reservas to the Central 
Bank and force Banco de Reservas to meet its liquidity needs 
through borrowing, preferably offshore. 
 
---------------------------- 
IDB Loan Will Boost Reserves 
---------------------------- 
7.  (SBU) The Fund representative also noted that the 
Dominican Congress did not pass the programmed $100 million 
IDB financial sector loan until President Mejia personally 
intervened March 18.  (Note: The loan was passed March 20. 
$40 million of the loan proceeds are to be used to increase 
Central Bank Reserves.) 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Banking Sector Audits Show Solvent System 
----------------------------------------- 
 
8.  (SBU) Mandeng reported that the IMF-imposed banking 
sector audits were nearly complete and that the preliminary 
results showed a healthier sector than anticipated.  He said 
there are still some questions concerning quality of assets, 
and that some capital may be \"re-circulating,\" but that the 
system was solvent.  Mandeng noted that as a next step, banks 
are required to submit a business plan to demonstrate how 
they will meet more stringent capital requirements.  Banks 
will initially have to meet a 10 percent capital adequacy 
ratio using local standards, and within three to five years, 
meet a 10 percent capital adequacy ratio in conformance with 
international standards.  Mandeng said the business plans 
would reveal which banks are viable. 
 
 
---------------------------- 
Paris Club - No Good Options 
---------------------------- 
 
9.  (SBU) Looking ahead to April\'s Paris Club negotiations, 
Mandeng said that the GODR had recently agreed not to make 
further payments to its private sector bondholders as part of 
its commitment to comparability of treatment.  Mandeng said 
that Paris Club refinancing presented a dilemma for the GODR 
and questioned whether the Paris Club should require 
comparability of treatment.  He explained that the GODR might 
not have sufficient time following negotiations to complete 
an orderly restructuring of its bonds before the April 27 
bond payment is due and therefore would be forced to default. 
 He said that the relatively small benefit of $80 to $100 
million in private sector cash flow (out of a total of $300 
million benefit from refinancing) was not very practical in 
terms of cost, especially if the GODR were forced to default. 
 However, Mandeng did not offer an alternative source for the 
funds. 
 
HERTELL 
"
"15271","3/23/2004 21:41","04SANTODOMINGO1873","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO537","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 001873 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ELAB, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: HEALTH WORKERS STRIKE - AGAIN 
 
REF: A. REF: (A) SANTO DOMINGO 0537 (NOTAL) 
 
     B. (B) SANTO DOMINGO 0794 (NOTAL) 
 
1. (SBU) Summary: A public health workers\' strike has 
virtually shut down outpatient services at Dominican public 
hospitals for five days beginning March 22, following similar 
but shorter work stoppages since January.  Government, civil 
society, and the press, while acknowledging a need for better 
pay and funding at the hospitals, have reacted negatively to 
the walkout, which is mainly affecting low-income persons who 
have no access to the private health care system here.  Under 
the nation\'s current difficult financial circumstances, the 
strikers are unlikely to achieve their goals of doubling 
salaries and alleviating shortages of medical supplies at the 
hospitals.  The strike\'s economic and political impact is 
expected to be minimal.  End summary. 
 
2. (U) Health workers at Dominican public hospitals, operated 
by the State Secretariat of Public Health and Dominican 
Social Security Institute, began a five-day nationwide strike 
March 22, pressing demands for a doubling of salaries and 
improvements in the hospitals.  The strike, led by the 
Dominican Medical Association (Colegio Medico Dominicano) and 
other professional groups, involving some 20,000 doctors, 
20,000 nurses, 7,000 dentists, plus clinical psychologists, 
pharmacists, and bioanalysts, shut down outpatient services 
at all 173 public hospitals except for emergency or critical 
cases.  Thousands of low-income Dominicans who depend on 
these services will have to postpone their appointments.  The 
strike is the fifth -- and longest -- work stoppage by health 
workers so far this year.  On the first day, strikers carried 
out the first of various planned peaceful demonstrations in 
neighborhoods near the hospitals. 
 
3. (U)  President Mejia threatened to withhold salaries for 
each day the employees are on strike, and Chamber of Deputies 
speaker Alfredo Pacheco (of the ruling PRD) threatened to 
remove a proposed salary increase from the legislative 
agenda.  Opposition PRSC Deputy and bloc leader Victor (Iso) 
Bisono acknowledged the need to raise taxes to provide 
additional funding for hospital salaries and supplies, but 
asserted that the National Congress could not pass any such 
bill in response to the \"blackmail\" of a five-day 
paralization of health services.  State Secretary of Public 
Health Jose Rodriguez Soldevilla (PRD) characterized the 
strike as inappropriate during an election campaign and the 
salary demands as excessive in the current economic crisis. 
Retired Catholic bishop (and main adviser to Cardinal 
Archbishop Nicolas de Jesus Lopez Rodriguez) denounced the 
strike as \"senseless, imprudent, heartless, and 
inconsiderate.\"  Editorials in two major daily papers opposed 
the strike. 
 
4. (U)  Following the first health workers\' strike January 
27, Mejia promised quicker disbursements to alleviate 
shortages of medicines, supplies, and equipment in the 
hospitals and suggested that a special commission propose 
legislation to finance a pay increase (Ref A).  The resulting 
bill, which proposes a tax on alcoholic beverages and tobacco 
products to finance the increase, has been referred to a 
Congressional committee.  Hospital services continue to 
suffer from supply shortages. 
 
5. (SBU) Comment: Health workers, like most Dominicans, have 
felt severely pinched during the past year between their 
stagnating incomes, a declining exchange rate, and inflation. 
 That said, the millions of low-income citizens who depend on 
public health services are unlikely to sympathize with the 
increasingly disruptive strikes.  The public mood has shifted 
since January, when a 24-hour public health workers\' strike 
was followed by a successful nationwide work stoppage in all 
sectors (Ref B).  Now, less than two months before the 
presidential election, voters are taking to the streets in 
campaign rallies, rather than participating in work stoppages 
or protests.  Moreover, middle- and upper-class patients 
generally have access to locally available private hospitals, 
which are unaffected by the latest health workers\' strike. 
 
6. (SBU) The strike has worthy goals, but is unlikely to 
achieve them in the nation\'s difficult financial 
circumstances.  The strike\'s impact on the economy, the 
government, and the presidential election campaign is 
expected to be minimal.  The public health workers have a 
history of sporadic walkouts, and the country has learned to 
put with them, despite the inconvenience and health 
consequences for low-income patients. 
HERTELL 
"
"15351","3/25/2004 18:04","04SANTODOMINGO1933","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 001933 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR, EB/OMA, WHA/PPSC, SES-CR; TREASURY FOR 
DO:NLEE, RTOLOUI, LLAMONICA; PARIS FOR TREASURY ATTACHE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, EFIN, OPDC 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN PRESIDENT MEJIA WRITES TO ASK FOR 
PRESIDENT BUSH\'S SUPPORT AT APRIL 13 PARIS CLUB NEGOTIATION 
 
REF: 3/25 E-MAIL FROM MEIGS 
 
1. (SBU) On March 25 the Foreign Ministry delivered the 
original of a letter from President Mejia for President Bush, 
under cover of a note from the Minister.  Following is 
Embassy\'s unofficial translation.  Embassy is faxing copy to 
WHA/CAR and to Treasury; original follows to SES-CR by pouch. 
 
2.  (Comment)  Technical Secretary of the Presidency Carlos 
Despradel will meet Treasury DAS Nancy Lee at the IDB meeting 
on March 28 to discuss the GODR\'s Paris Club approach. 
Despradel confirmed to DCM and econoff yesterday that 
President Mejia has given specific instructions that the 
government is to comply strictly with all IMF goals. 
Despradel is concerned by what he believes is an internal 
contradiction in the program; he will describe this in detail 
to DAS Lee. 
 
3.(begin text of unofficial translation) 
 
 
(Seal of the Dominican Republic) 
 
Hipolito Mejia 
President of the Dominican Republic 
 
March 23, 2004 
 
 
Dear Mr. President, 
 
It is an honor to write to you to ask for your attention to 
an issue of great interest for the Dominican Republic, 
related to the severe banking crisis that we faced last year, 
which cost the equivalent of 20 percent of the Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP). 
 
For this reason I ask for your spirited intervention, since 
in confronting this situation we have had to seek the 
assistance of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) with the 
signature of a Standby Agreement for a period of two years, 
the next quarterly review of which will occur at the end of 
the current month of March.  In this regard we have done 
taken all the measures within our power to comply with the 
strict fiscal and monetary goals agreed with the Fund. 
 
The agreement with the IMF projects, among other things, a 
balance of payments gap of USD 320 million for the year 2004, 
which we agreed to cover by renegotiating part of the 
external debt falling due this year, including only those 
bilateral debts incurred before 1984 with countries members 
of the Paris Club. 
 
The meetings with Paris Club members are set for April 13. 
We are preparing for these with the assistance of experts in 
these matters. 
 
Mr. President, in outlining to you above the economic 
situation, my aim is to seek your spirited personal 
intervention, so that the officials of your government 
attending these meetings help us to conclude a renegotiation 
that enables our country to overcome the serious economic 
problems we face, without incurring future charges so costly 
that they do not justify, in financial terms, the 
renegotiation, especially with private creditors. 
 
Thanking you, Mr. President and my friend, for the courtesy 
of your close attention to this request, permit me to use 
this opportunity to offer, once again, the assurances of my 
personal esteem and personal appreciation. 
 
(signed) 
 
Hiplito Meja 
 
His Excellency 
George W. Bush 
President of the United States of America 
Washington DC 
 
(end text) 
HERTELL 
"
"15355","3/25/2004 21:36","04SANTODOMINGO1943","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 001943 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM, KJUS, PHUM, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC APPROVES NEW POLICE LAW 
 
1. Summary.  As part of the March 2 ceremony celebrating the 
68th anniversary of the National Police, President Mejia 
signed the National Police Institutional Law (Law 96-04), 
also known as the Police Reform Bill.  One of the most 
significant changes under the new law is the transfer of the 
Metropolitan Transport Authority (AMET) agents to police 
control from a transportation function.  Other important 
changes include stricter prerequisites for the police chief 
position, such as 20 years of uninterrupted service to 
qualify, a two-year term limit as police chief, an article on 
gender equality, and a ranking system commensurate with their 
education, experience and time served in grade.  Civil 
society opponents think the law gives too much control to the 
Police Chief, criticizing the law as a \"step backwards\" for 
not incorporating important initiatives that had received 
public approval.  Although the law has been on the books for 
several weeks, AMET is still headed by former Police Chief, 
Pedro de Jesus Candelier.  End Summary. 
 
POLICE REFORM BILL BECOMES LAW 
 
2. Almost three years after it was first introduced in 
Congress, on March 2 President Mejia signed a new National 
Police Institutional Law, also known as the Police Reform 
Bill.  The new law transfers control of Metropolitan 
Transport Authority (AMET) agents to police control. 
Additional changes include the following: stricter 
prerequisites for the police chief position, a provision 
prohibiting an active duty member of the armed services from 
being named police chief, a provision prohibiting repeat 
terms for the police chief, an article on gender equality, a 
ranking system commensurate with education and experience, 
and a 17-member Superior Council to review infractions.  The 
law defines the National Police as a non-partisan, apolitical 
civil organization that strictly adheres to the Constitution 
of the Dominican Republic. 
 
3. Prior to the its promulgation Senator Tonty Rutinel, 
chairman of the Committee on Interior and Justice, invited 
emboffs for a briefing on the most significant aspects of the 
law.  According to Rutinel, previously police officers who 
were fired or suspended could return to their posts, but the 
new law prohibits such action.  Rutinel said one of the most 
important changes in the law is that it establishes promotion 
precepts, because now officers are required to have four 
years in rank and a clean record in order to be promoted.  He 
acknowledged the rumors that some officers commit human 
rights abuses in order to achieve rank -- a practice he hopes 
will be corrected in part by the new law.  He further 
acknowledged that the article granting police authority over 
AMET was the most contentious, and he appeared bothered that 
other improvements would be overshadowed by the AMET 
controversy. 
 
CIVIL SOCIETY NOT PLEASED 
 
4. Civil society opponents claim the new Police law has 
shortcomings for several reasons, primarily because it vests 
too much control in the Police Chief.  Opponents also believe 
the Government excluded civil society from its deliberation. 
Some argue that the law contradicts measures in pre-existing 
laws such as the Criminal Procedures Code, which replaces a 
Napoleonic system to one more similar to U.S. standards. 
Civil society representatives charge that the law is 
bureaucratically cumbersome, because it creates a Superior 
Council of 17 officials (from law enforcement and other 
agencies) to formulate policy.  This, in civil society 
opinion, threatens the institutionality of the National 
Police. 
 
COMMENT 
 
5. (SBU) Passage of the new National Police Institutional Law 
was long overdue.  Reactions  have been mixed.  AMET chief 
Gen. Candelier had confidently told the press that President 
Mejia would not sign the law; in fact, Mejia did so but on 
the last possible day.  Most agree that reforms were 
necessary but opinions differed on approaches.  It might have 
been more sensible to leave the responsibility of AMET agents 
as a transportation function rather than a police one, but it 
remains to be seen whether the institutions can adapt and 
work together. 
HERTELL 
"
"15390","3/26/2004 18:23","04SANTODOMINGO1950","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE52123","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 001950 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), L/LEI (FUENTES AND TAYLOR), PM 
JUSTICE FOR CRIM/OIA J. MAZUREK AND R. GOLDMAN 
US MARSHAL SERVICE PLEASE PASS TO C. DUDLEY 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/24/2014 
TAGS: CJAN, DR, KCRM, KJUS, SNAR, PREL, MARR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ATTORNEY GENERAL PROMISES ARTICLE 98 AND 
EXTRADITIONS 
 
REF: A. STATE 52123 
 
     B. SANTO DOMINGO 683 
     C. SANTO DOMINGO 515 
     D. SANTO DOMINGO 795 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Hans. H. Hertell, reasons 1.5(b) and (d). 
 
 1.  (U)  Summary.  On March 24 Dominican Attorney General 
Victor Cespedes Martinez promised the Ambassador that he 
would act swiftly on the Article 98 agreement, facilitate 
extradition requests and work to improve the handling of 
narcotics/narcotrafficking cases in the Dominican Republic. 
End Summary. 
 
------------------ 
Article 98 
------------------ 
 
2.  (C)  The Ambassador received Attorney General Cespedes on 
March 24 at the Attorney General\'s request.  The Ambassador 
stressed the importance of swift movement on Article 98 and 
Cespedes stated that the USG could count on his immediate 
support.  Cespedes should receive the Article 98 agreement 
from the Foreign Ministry within days.  He will review it and 
forward it to the legal office at the Presidency.  The legal 
office at the Presidency will be the final stop before the 
agreement is sent to Congress for ratification.  Cespedes 
said he will push for immediate ratification once the 
agreement in the Congress. 
 
------------------ 
Extraditions 
------------------ 
 
3.  (C)  On extraditions, Cespedes stated confidently that no 
other Latin American country, and perhaps no other country in 
the world, works as closely with the USG on extradition 
requests.  He said he wanted to continue the close 
relationship and ensure that the process was 
institutionalized.  For the first time, he told Emboffs to 
contact him directly in regard to any extradition case 
instead of sending requests and questions to Assistant 
Attorney General Francisco Cadena Moquete.  He stated his 
desire to have the best extradition record of any Dominican 
Attorney General. 
 
4.  (C)  When the Ambassador asked about the release on March 
23 of Lourdes Ivelise Machuca, a fugitive for whom we had 
requested extradition in October 2003, Cespedes appeared 
unaware of the extradition request.  He told us that he would 
re-arrest Ms. Machuca and she would be extradited in the same 
manner in which Josefina Rojas was re-arrested and extradited 
(reftel B).  Cespedes told us that he signed a medical 
release order for her because she is suffering from \"suicidal 
tendencies.\"  He said she is hospitalized and receiving 
treatment.  On March 25 poloff supplied the Attorney General 
with another copy of the extradition request for Ms. Machuca. 
 
 
5.  (C)  Within the last week, Cespedes has signed 17 
provisional arrest warrants for fugitives believed to be 
located in the Dominican Republic.  The signed orders have 
been passed to the local authorities and Embassy DEA, LEGAT 
and U.S. Marshal offices.  One of the provisional arrest 
warrants is for Ramon Garcia, (reftel C) a fugitive who was 
arrested and released by the GODR last year. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Narco-trafficking and Money Laundering 
--------------------------------------- 
 
6. (SBU)  The Ambassador asked Cespedes what could be done to 
improve prosecution of narcotics/narcotrafficking cases. 
Cespedes said that nacrotrafficking policy has strengthened 
quite a bit in recent years.  He said he had given directives 
for a mandatory process which attaches a single prosecutor to 
all phases of a given narcotics case, in effect, reducing the 
possibility of case tampering by an interceding prosecutor. 
Arrest warrants and legal confirmation papers must be signed 
at the time of capture.  According to Cespedes, all 
narcotrafficking cases are treated with the utmost care.  He 
told us that we should notify him personally if we encounter 
any irregularities with any of the prosecuting officials in 
narcotrafficking cases. 
 
7.  (C)  Cespedes said there is little he can do in 
narcotrafficking and money laundering cases in regard to 
asset forfeiture.  He stated the Dominican money laundering 
law is new and untested.  He said that he would work with the 
DNCD in any way possible to assist them in seizing assets, 
however, he pointed out, asset seizure responsibility does 
not lie in his office. 
 
-------- 
Comment 
-------- 
 
8.  (C)  Attorney General Cespedes is of questionable 
character.  Until he became Attorney General, there had been 
no extradition cases in which an arrested fugitive had been 
released rather than returned to the USG (reftel B).  He has 
misled us in the past and we believe he has lied directly. 
The Ambassador previously expressed USG concerns about the 
Attorney General to President Mejia and President Mejia told 
us that he planned to remove the Attorney General from his 
position (reftel D). 
 
9.  (C)  At this juncture, Cespedes seems eager to please the 
USG.  It appears that he is fighting for his job or perhaps a 
\"promotion\" (e.g., to the Supreme Court bench, as rumored in 
the press).  It is possible that he has heard rumors that the 
USG has questions about him. This may be the motivation for 
his sudden desire to cooperate with us. 
HERTELL 
"
"15395","3/26/2004 20:03","04SANTODOMINGO1963","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 001963 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/PPC, AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, MARR, ASEC, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTIONS #31: ARMED FORCES TO PROVIDE 
SECURITY 
 
 
1. (U) This is number 31 in our series on the Dominican 
presidential election: 
 
 ARMED FORCES TO PROVIDE SECURITY FOR ELECTIONS 
 
(SBU) The Dominican military leadership has assured us the 
military will be on \"model\" nonpolitical behavior during the 
election and previewed preparations for providing security to 
the May 16 election. On March 22 in separate meetings State 
Secretary of the Armed Forces LTG Jose Miguel Soto Jimenez 
 
SIPDIS 
and Deputy J-2 BG Clase told us the newly constituted 
Electoral Police (Policia Electoral) will consist of some 
7,000 military personnel from the three services and a larger 
number of National Police (PN), with a probable combined 
strength of 40,000-42,000.  This will be higher than the 
37,000 deployed in the 2002 legislative/municipal election 
because the number of voting tables (colegios electorales) 
has increased. 
 
(SBU) President Mejia has given command to Army MG Elvio 
Guerrero Reyes. He and his command will come under the 
control of Central Election Board (JCE) president Luis Arias 
from 24 hours before the election until several days 
afterward (or until the JCE has resolved any disputes about 
election returns).  On March 25 the military begin a week of 
training of military and police officers who will in turn 
train their units. The training operation is scheduled to be 
complete by early May. 
 
(U) Electoral Police will wear distinctive armbands issued by 
the JCE.  In general, two will be assigned to each voting 
table, though in locations where many tables share a 
location, a single guard will stand at each table, with 
others in the building on call if needed.  The Electoral 
Police will guard JCE headquarters, regional facilities, the 
134 municipal election boards where returns will be compiled 
and entered into the JCE computer system, and data 
transmission systems between the municipalities and the Santo 
Domingo headquarters. 
 
(SBU) Military escorts will accompany movements of election 
materials and personnel between the municipal boards and the 
approximately 12,300 voting tables as well as between the 
muncipalities and Santo Domingo. To assuring safe transit the 
entire Armed Forces will be made available to the JCE as 
needed, including land vehicles and aircraft.  Soto said he 
might use light observation helicopters to transport ballots 
to and from remote areas (in our view, not such a good idea, 
given the tight seating in these helicopters). The JCE will 
have priority access to the GODR motor pool on and around 
election day. (One possible benefit: this could hinder 
government officials from using official vehicles to get 
transport voters.) 
 
(SBU) Soto assured us that the Armed Forces would play \"as 
impartial a role as possible\" in the election process. He 
says hee intends their behavior to be \"a model for the 
region.\"  He said he would propose two measures to the 
President in this regard: 
 
-- that the Armed Forces be confined to their garrisons for 
one week prior to election day to prevent military personnel 
from participating in political marches or rallies and that 
all personnel be required to have short haircuts, so they 
would be easy to spot in any rallies, even if they are in 
mufti; and 
 
-- that officers due for retirement but still on active duty 
for prestige reasons be immediately reassigned to reserve 
status (many are active in partisan politics). 
(SBU) Soto said President Mejia had instructed him to allow 
the DATT free access to the military so as to confirm the 
forces\'  political neutrality.  We are following up on that 
invitation. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Bainbridge Cowell. 
 
3. (U)  This report and others in this series can be read on 
the SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ index.cfm along 
with extensive other current material. 
HERTELL 
"
"15396","3/26/2004 20:22","04SANTODOMINGO1965","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 001965 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/PPC, AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/25/2008 
TAGS: PGOV, MARR, HA, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ARMED FORCES CHIEF ON HAITI, NEXT 
DOMINICAN AMBASSADOR 
 
 
Classified By: ECOPOL Counselor Michael Meigs for Reason 1.5 (b) and (d 
). 
 
1. (C) In conversation with DATT and poloff on March 22 
Dominican Armed Forces Secretary LTG Soto Jiminez expressed 
concern over \"gangs of criminals\" that he said controlled the 
Haitian side of the northern border with the Dominican 
Republic.  Dominican security forces along the border 
consequently have no authorized counterparts with whom to 
coordinate border controls and other issues.  The gangs 
collected illegal taxes from traders or blocked their passage 
when they tried to cross the border to engage in legitimate 
commerce, particularly at weekly markets on which many 
Dominicans and Haitians depend for food or income.  Soto 
urged that the multinational interim force in Haiti deploy 
troops to re-establish Haitian government authority in the 
north. 
 
2. (C) Soto told us that the previous Dominican ambassador in 
Port-au-Prince Despradel would not return, owing to alleged 
abuse of his position.  The new ambassador will be a military 
officer, who because of his experience will be better able to 
assess the unstable security situation. 
 
3. (U) Port au Prince minimize considered. 
HERTELL 
"
"15459","3/29/2004 17:18","04SANTODOMINGO1986","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO1518","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 001986 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/PPC, AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION #32: BATTLE OF THE POLLS 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 1518 (NOTAL) 
 
1. (SBU) This is no. 32 in our series on the Dominican 
presidential election: 
 
BATTLE OF THE POLLS 
 
Two polls published today, March 29, both show a much tighter 
presidential race, indicating that President Hipolito Mejia 
has picked up considerable support. Polls were done the same 
week in March (March 18-March 23), each with a sample 
universe of 1200 from across the country.  Serious 
discrepancies between the polls are a warning that samples 
can be cooked as well as estimated. 
 
A survey done by U.S. firm Hamilton Beattie & Staff for daily 
\"Hoy\" shows Leonel Fernandez (PLD) with 52 percent, with an 
estimated error of  /- 3 percent.  Mejia (PRD) is second with 
25 percent, with Estrella (PRSC) at 17 percent. Hamilton 
reports that in matches for a hypothetical second round 
Leonel Fernandez will win -- with 59 percent if confronting 
Mejia and 54 percent if confronting Estrella. 
 
A poll done by \"Consulting Express West, Inc.\",(CEW) 180 West 
Broadway Avenue, New York, puts Fernandez at 47 percent with 
an estimated error of  /- 3.2 percent, with Eduardo Estrella 
second at 23.7 percent and Mejia at 15 percent. Rejection 
rates are 72.1 percent for Mejia, 20.6 percent for Fernandez, 
and 3.5 percent for Estrella.  CEW results for hypothetical 
second round matches suggest that Mejia would lose 
disastrously but that Estrella could edge ahead of Fernandez 
47 percent to 45 percent. 
 
In either case Fernandez has slipped from the comfortable 63 
percent in a Gallup poll in February, much as we expected. 
and is now within sampling error of failing to win on the 
first round. 
 
Hoy\'s numbers 
 
The \"Hoy\" poll provides some evidence that Mejia and VP 
candidate Subervi have had some impact with whirlwind 
campaign events all over the country.  These have included 
presidential inaugurations of hundreds of public works 
projects, some rushed to completion for the campaign and 
others, already in operation, slightly refurbished to justify 
another ceremony.  There is now a patched-up unity of the PRD 
-- with only ousted party president Hatuey De Camps remaining 
adamantly opposed to Mejia\'s re-election bid. 
 
Many of the nominal PRD members, however, have yet to be 
convinced not to abscond to Leonel.  Voters\' party sympathy 
expressed both polls tracked their candidate preferences. 
Leonel\'s PLD 50 percent, Hipolito\'s PRD 28 percent, and 
Estrella\'s PRSC 16 percent.  Hamilton-\"Hoy\" confirms that the 
 PRSC is definitely in decline, a trend evident already 
beforethe 2002 death of aged Dominican strongman Joaquin 
Balaguer.  The preference for the PRSC has declined from 25 
percent in 2000. 
 
Most of the poll respondents -- across gender and age groups, 
occupations, and regions -- view Fernandez favorably (64 
percent) and Mejia unfavorably (67 percent).  The only 
exception is farmers, where former agriculture minister (and 
farmer) Mejia eked out a 51 percent favorable rating.  PRD 
vice-presidential candidate Subervi also fared badly: 61 
percent of respondents didn\'t like him. 
 
Voters\' confidence in electoral process, also included in the 
\"Hoy\" poll, appears to have ticked up slightly.  In January, 
a poll by another U.S. firm showed 64 percent of voters 
having \"little or no confidence\" in the Central Election 
Board (JCE) that is organizing the election and will 
adjudicate the outcome and 70 percent believing the JCE would 
be independent or neutral.  In the latest poll, 71 percent of 
respondents rated the JCE as \"good\" or \"excellent\" on its 
handling the electoral process -- but 58 percent still saw 
some likelihood of electoral fraud. 
 
Lies, damned lies and polls 
 
Part of the comfortable myth about the U.S. Embassy in the 
Dominican Republic is that we know everything that it is 
going on.  Many are convinced that we are doing our own 
electoral opinion polling.  We do not, in part because very 
often the owners of poll information are happy to share it 
with us before they go public with it.  Still, these poll 
reports serve as a reminder that the apparent precision of 
statistics covers a world of uncertainty.  How representative 
were those 1200-person samples?  Did events intervening in 
the course of that week change some minds? How reputable were 
the polling firms?  Were data massaged after delivery?  A 
casual conspiratorial interpretation might well be that 
Estrella supporters aimed at taking the wind out of the sails 
of both the PLD and the PRD by fielding a barely plausible 
version of the future that would put Estrella into the palace. 
 
The undeniable conclusion is that the campaigning is now 
underway in earnest.  Fernandez is still the man to beat; and 
his job is to stay credible, to stay on message, and to 
protect his lead. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Bainbridge Cowell, Michael Meigs. 
 
3. (U) This report and others in this series can be read on 
the SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ index.cfm along 
with extensive other current material. 
HERTELL 
"
"15462","3/29/2004 19:25","04SANTODOMINGO1989","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 001989 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTIONS #33:  BALAGUER\'S GHOST 
 
 
1.  (SBU) Following is no. 33 in our series on the Dominican 
elections: 
 
Balaguer,s Ghost 
 
Avaunt! And quit my sight! Let the earth hide thee! 
Thy bones are marrowless, thy blood is cold; 
Thou hast no speculation in those eyes 
Which thou dost glare with. 
                         - - Macbeth, Act 3, scene 4 
 
 
The message that Embassy Santo Domingo has been picking up 
most strongly about the May 16 elections is that of a 
pervasive but diffuse fear of the election process itself. 
For example: 
 
     Influential, sophisticated business executives have 
told the Ambassador apparently in all sincerity that if the 
ruling PRD wins this election, \"there will be civil war.\" 
 
      Provincial PLD leaders speak with great anxiety about 
claims of Mejia,s faction distributing guns to party members 
so they can disrupt polling stations favorable to the PLD. 
 
     Last week a senior PRSC official in Barahona evoked 
repeatedly his worry that \"phantom\" polling centers would be 
created by the National Elections Board, \"ten or more for 
each province, to give the PRD the margin to put the election 
into a second round.\" 
 
     We earlier reported the paranoid notions of supporters 
of the PLD,s single national senator, Tomas Perez, who 
asserted that the PRD-dominated Congress would seek any 
pretext to cancel or postpone elections and put an interim 
unelected pro-PRD government in place. 
 
     And on March 26 PRD President Vicente Sanchez Barnett 
formally complained to the Elections Board (JCE), seeking to 
block the PLD from setting up its own computer network in 
parallel with that of the JCE, on the pretext that the PLD,s 
plan to collect and announce provisional results ahead of the 
JCE would be a threat to public order: \"Just imagine, 
honorable judges, if we were to do such a thing, driven by 
rashness and desperation, in a situation so delicate for the 
democratic health of the country.\" 
 
And yet - - 
 
The JCE will be using an improved version of election 
procedures that functioned successfully in 1996 and 2000; 
representatives of each party will be present at each voting 
station and will certify the tally sheets; the domestic NGO 
\"Participacion Ciudadana\" is well on the way to training and 
fielding observers for every polling station; the OAS 
election observers financed by the United States, Canada and 
- -  probably - - the European Union will be accredited to 
circulate freely to monitor the process; about 40,000 
military and police will be providing security, in accordance 
with specific training; and President Mejia has told the 
military leadership to allow the U.S. Defense Attache to 
observe \"anything he wants.\"   The JCE has signed a contract 
for a U.S. firm to review a random 10 percent of the voter 
registration rolls so as to evaluate whether the 
long-uncorrected files show any systemic partisan bias.  The 
Ambassador and Embassy staff have consistently assured 
Dominicans of our serene confidence that the elections will 
be free, fair and transparent.  But the persistent question 
from our interlocutors has been, \"But what if they are not? 
What will you do about it?\" 
 
The Ghost 
 
Joaquin Balaguer died in 2002, a scant two years after he 
declined to enter a presidential second round against 
Hipolito Mejia,s 49% score, but he is still as vividly 
present as Banquo,s ghost in the ceremony of presidential 
election.  The visceral reaction against Mejia,s re-election 
bid was shaped in large part by the memories of Balaguer,s 
repeated manipulation of elections to ensure his own 
continuation, most recently only ten years ago.  The 1994 
elections were so flagrantly fraudulent that domestic and 
international pressure finally obliged Balaguer into 
negotiations that cut his four-year term to two and produced 
a constitutional ban on re-election.  Dominican intellectuals 
- - and quite a few Dominican politicians - - now argue that 
after 30 years of Trujillo and a total of 22 years of 
Balaguer, re-election is a poisoned concept for this country. 
 In a country rife with corruption and pursuit of spoils, 
they argue, only an absolute prohibition of re-election gives 
any hope of clearing out the most recent set of rascals 
abusing the people. 
 
Hipolito Mejia,s railroading tactics have only reinforced 
these views.  He used his heavy PRD majority in Congress and 
(assert many) both arm-twisting and bribery to throw out the 
six-year-old Constitutional prohibition on re-election.  Of 
the 9 Electoral Board judges elected by Congress, all but two 
have links with the PRD.  Senate and House of Representatives 
have selected two new members for the six-person Judicial 
Counsel that selects Supreme Court justices, a none too 
subtle reminder that Mejia,s party is ready to try to shift 
the balance on the court, if necessary.  Mejia,s aggressive 
rhetoric and harsh disdain for his principal rival feed the 
fears that he will do almost literally anything in order to 
stay in power. 
 
In our view, Mejia believes he has a good shot at actually 
winning these elections if he can succeed in pushing them 
into a second round.  Part of this is ego and the arrogance 
of power; part of it is the calculation that the PRD can 
succeed with the poorer voters in convincing them that the 
PRD is better able to take care of them.  At the same time, 
the PRD has begun systematically tarring Fernandez with 
assertions of corrupt involvement in the Baninter frauds. 
 
Spreading out, multiplying forces 
 
This atmosphere and disposition of forces does much to 
explain Leonel Fernandez,s insistent requests in Washington, 
publicly and privately, for the United States and other 
international donors to increase resources for election 
observation.  The Ambassador,s public announcement on March 
19 of U.S. financial support for the OAS team has brought a 
perceptible lowering in the tensions over the electoral 
process; we suspect that comments we,ve heard since that 
date are now more rhetorical than real. 
 
Even so, memories of rotten elections remain very close to 
the surface.  Despite the recent campaign managers, 
agreement to program public events to avoid partisan 
confrontations, and despite the admonitions of the church and 
civic society to avoid name-calling, tensions are rising. 
Irregularities or unforeseen clashes could slip into local 
violence in the 50 days that remain before the vote. 
 
During that time Embassy officers are traveling repeatedly to 
provincial capitals in a systematic initiative to establish 
contacts with the major parties, the private sector, the 
provincial electoral board, the media, and the local chapter 
of the national civic NGO \"Participacion Ciudadana.\"  Our 
message is one of civic participation, civic responsibility, 
and international observation - - reminding questioners that 
the Dominicans themselves will have to assure the 
transparency of their own electoral process.   In general, 
we,ve found that the Dominicans outside the capital are 
eager to meet us and to hear that message. 
 
But Balaguer,s ghost is still very much with them.  In fact, 
reporters from the \"Diario Libre\" newspaper confirmed that 
dead though he may be, the enigmatic blind old man is still 
registered to vote on May 16. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Michael Meigs. 
 
3. (U)  This report and others in our elections series are 
available on the SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ index.cfm along 
with extensive other current material. 
 
 
 
 
HERTELL 
"
"15552","3/31/2004 19:53","04SANTODOMINGO2026","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04SANTODOMINGO1873","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 002026 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR, EB/TRA; DEPT PASS DEPT OF TRANSPORTATION 
AND FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/31/2008 
TAGS: EAIR, ELAB, DR, MARR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN GOVERNMENT LOCKS OUT AIR TRAFFIC 
CONTROLLERS, MILITARIZES SERVICES 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 1873 (NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske.  Reason: 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1.  (U) At 0600 this morning March 31 Civil Aviation 
officials replaced civilian air traffic controllers at the 
national center (SDQ) with military air traffic controllers. 
The military controllers are instituting precautionary 
intervals for incoming, departing, and overhead traffic; some 
flights are currently delayed up to 2 hours in departing from 
Santo Domingo. 
 
2.  (U) Civilian air traffic controllers have been 
negotiating for pay rises, with their request being for a 100 
percent increase.  Bolivar Deleon, president of their 
association, told Ecopol counselor that their last salary 
increase was in 1997.  Newspapers had carried comment that 
the civilian controllers had been warning of demonstration 
measures, probably ten-minute delays for all flights, to be 
initiated this weekend, in advance of Easter week. 
 
3.  (SBU)  American Airlines country manager Eduardo Delpozo 
confirmed at noon that traffic was moving normally, although 
with delays. No flights have been cancelled  All airports 
outside Santo Domingo are regularly staffed by military 
controllers, so their situation is unchanged.  Delpozo notes 
that there are fewer military controllers than civilians, but 
he has heard that the government may be getting supplementary 
military staff from Mexico or Panama. 
 
4.  (C)  The Ambassador raised the subject during a call on 
President Mejia at 1 p.m., and Mejia confirmed the action. 
\"We have just trained twenty-one new air controllers, with 
U.S. help.\"  He was dismissive of the civilian controllers\' 
demands.  \"They make more than I do, and they\'re asking for 
double their salaries.\" 
 
5.  (SBU) Deleon told Ecopol counselor that the locked-out 
controllers are seeking an intermediary with the government. 
He hopes to convince businessman Frank Ranieri to take their 
side.  Deleon stressed that the six-person team at the SDQ 
center is handling work usually done by a staff of twenty, 
and he said that none of the center\'s technical staff was on 
shift to deal with maintenance or systems problems. 
 
6.  (SBU)  Comment. It appears that the government can manage 
the air traffic control system and that this dispute can be 
resolved, although probably with little or no extra pay for 
the controllers.  Theirs is a much more limited labor dispute 
than the persistent action undertaken by government-employed 
physicians, where Mejia recently secured a truce with his 
promise to talk after Easter.  Given the financial and fiscal 
crisis -- and the IMF program -- the government has 
essentially no resources to meet salary demands for either 
group. Mejia was not particularly interested in talking about 
the dispute with the air traffic controllers, except to make 
a reference to President Reagan\'s decision to replace 
striking U.S. controllers in the 1980\'s.  And assuming that 
the government does have sufficient military staff to operate 
the SDQ center, a show of decisiveness would probably do him 
no harm in the current presidential campaign. 
HERTELL 
"
"15654","4/2/2004 19:08","04SANTODOMINGO2072","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SANTODOMINGO2026","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 002072 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR, EB/TRA; DEPT PASS DEPT OF TRANSPORTATION 
AND FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, EAIR, ELAB, MARR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN GOVERNMENT AND AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLERS 
OVERCOME STRIKE 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 02026 
 
 1.  Many civilian air traffic controllers returned to work 
today after the Dominican Civil Aviation Authority and 
Dominican Air Traffic Controllers Union reached an agreement 
early today. Representatives from both parties explained to 
econoff that agreement was reached at 1:30 am after many 
hours of negotiating.  The union acknowledged that the GODR 
is in no position to increase salaries at this time.  The 
parties will continue to engage one other on other 
work-related issues.  Indications are that operations are \"70 
to 80 percent back to normal.\"  Embassy will continue to 
monitor the situation. 
KUBISKE 
"
"15690","4/5/2004 10:57","04SANTODOMINGO2078","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 002078 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KCOR, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION #34: CORRUPTION AND THE 
CANDIDATES 
 
1.  (SBU)  This is cable # 34 in our series on the Dominican 
presidential election: 
 
CORRUPTION AND THE CANDIDATES 
 
The heat of the campaign and the insistence of the Ambassador 
and U.S.-funded civic groups have finally brought the 
explosive issue of corruption into open debate.  On March 26 
the government\'s lawyers in Miami filed a civil action 
against Baninter suspect Luis Alvarez Renta, as the Mejia and 
Fernandez campaigns have been trading barbs about who knew 
what when.  We\'ll have more to report about that, soon.  For 
the moment, however, we\'re taking satisfaction in the outcome 
and reports of events sponsored by two USAID-supported 
non-partisan NGOs. 
 
Estrella as Mr. Clean 
 
NGO \"Foundation for Institutionality and Justice\" (FINJUS) 
has asked the three major candidates to address directly the 
issue of corruption. PRSC presidential candidate Eduardo 
Estrella spoke to more than 500 supporters and election 
watchers at the first event in the FINJUS series on March 10. 
 Third-ranked Estrella criticized the attorney general\'s 
office for lack of prosecutions on corruption cases and 
pledged to improve internal controls in that office, if 
elected.  He called for civil society and church groups to 
serve as watchdogs over government institutions and measures 
to enhance efficiency of state services and enterprises.  He 
advocated purging nepotism from government, saying that \"(we 
need) to get rid of people who are receiving salaries for 
doing nothing.\" 
 
Estrella called for implementation of an ethics code for all 
government employees, as well as mandatory public financial 
disclosure by government officials.  Invoking the Dominican 
trinity of Joaquin Balaguer, Juan Bosch and Jose Francisco 
Pena Gomez, Estrella  promised that \"the hour to renovate our 
social contract with the country has arrived.  I, Eduardo 
Estrella, will do it.\" 
 
Estrella is running on his image of honesty.  He has 
reinforced this theme since the FINJUS event, telling crowds, 
\"As Minister of Public Works, I had billions of pesos passing 
through my hands and I didn\'t keep a single peso.\"  This 
approach is consistent with his campaign theme \"El pais no 
aguanta mas!\" (\"The country can\'t stand it any more!\"), 
emblazoned on billboards beneath an image of the candidate 
looking grumpily reproachful. 
 
Leonel Fernandez - articulate and organized 
 
The second FINJUS event on March 24 received mixed treatment. 
 Increasingly pro-Mejia (and increasingly shrill) daily 
\"Listin Diario\" headlined on its front page the introductory 
remarks of the USAID Mission director Brineman as if they 
were the main event and broke new ground (in fact, Assistant 
Secretary Noriega and the Ambassador had earlier been equally 
 
SIPDIS 
explicit about fraud and corruption in the collapsed Baninter 
and Bancredito scandals). 
 
Ex-president Fernandez\'s 45-minute address was very political 
but nevertheless substantive.  At times reading from his 
party\'s draft platform (released March 29 - septel), he took 
credit for anti-corruption achievements in his 1996-2000 
administration and proposed additional measures for 
institutional safeguards against corruption.  The Department 
for Prevention of Administrative Corruption (DEPRECO), 
established in 1996, had been \"perverted\" by Mejia\'s 
appointees and should be replaced by a National Office of 
Prevention and Prosecution of Corruption, argued Leonel.  A 
1979 law requiring senior officials to declare their personal 
assets should be enforced. 
Fernandez would establish an \"integrated system of government 
financial management,\" with a standard outside accounting 
system for all agencies and public access to the information 
via internet.  He would order a comparative study of best 
practices in other Latin American countries, such as Chile, 
to see what might be adapted for use in the GODR.  He would 
advance compliance with international conventions against 
corruption, respect the independence of the judiciary and 
professionalize prosecutors, and collaborate with civil 
society groups, churches, media, and USAID on efforts to 
inculcate non-corrupt values in society.  At the same time, 
he denounced \"a group of mafiosi\" in the media \"at the 
service of corruption.\"  He opposed granting former 
presidents immunity from prosecution, saying they should take 
responsibility for their actions, and quipped, \"That\'s why 
I\'m here.\" 
A listener asked what Fernandez would do about the BANINTER 
banking fraud scandal if elected.  Fernandez promised no 
executive branch interference in the prosecutions underway in 
the courts.  Another question about a corruption scandal at 
the end of his  administration, involving a jobs program 
(Programa de Empleo Minimo Eventual - PEME), prompted 
Fernandez to assert that such programs should be cleaned up, 
not eliminated -- implicitly acknowledging that abuses had 
occurred.  He deftly drew a parallel with alleged welfare 
fraud in the United States.  Shortly after the speech, senior 
officials in President Mejia\'s re-election campaign renewed 
accusations that Fernandez knew of the BANINTER problem 
before leaving office but swept it under the rug. 
 
President Mejia has accepted the invitation by FINJUS to 
speak at the planned third anti-corruption meeting on April 
14. 
 
Twenty years of impunity 
 
On March 25, Participacion Ciudadana (PC - Citizens\' 
Participation) released a survey of corruption cases in the 
Dominican Republic,\"Twenty Years of Impunity: Investigation 
of Corruption Cases in the Dominican Justice System, 
1983-2003.\" Researchers found that only six of the 227 cases 
that reached the justice system in that period resulted in 
full prosecutions, leading to dismissal or acquittal in five 
of those cases.  Only one case resulted in a conviction, 
brief incarceration, and then a pardon that relieved the 
guity party of paying the assessed fine and damages.  PC 
Coordinator Alfonso Abreu Collado told a panel audience that 
the typical official response has been to allow the accused 
\"a clean slate and a new start.\"  The cases covered 
administrations of all three major parties. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Bainbridge Cowell. 
 
3. (U) This report and others in our election series are 
available on the SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ index.cfm along 
with extensive other current material. 
KUBISKE 
"
"15746","4/6/2004 11:01","04SANTODOMINGO2100","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE74537","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 002100 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR PM/RSAT AND PM/PMAT; 
JOINT STAFF FOR J-5 INMA COALITION AFFAIRS. 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/05/2014 
TAGS: PREL, MOPS, DR 
SUBJECT: RESPONSE TO JAYSH AL-MAHDI VIOLENCE AGAINST 
COALITION IN IRAQ 
 
REF: SECSTATE 74537 
 
Classified By: EcoPol counselor Michael Meigs.  Reason: 1.5 (b) and (d) 
. 
 
1.  EcoPol counselor is delivering ref demarche to Vice 
Minister of Foreign Affairs Miguel Pichardo this afternoon 
and Defense Attache has already made the same points with 
Secretary of the Armed Forces MG Soto Jimenez.  Embassy will 
 
SIPDIS 
report their responses as appropriate. 
KUBISKE 
"
"15809","4/7/2004 17:27","04SANTODOMINGO2183","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE63901","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 002183 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) AND S/CT AND INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, ASEC, PREL, DR 
SUBJECT: CTAG DEMARCHE DELIVERED TO GODR 
 
REF: A. STATE 63901 
 
     B. SANTO DOMINGO 1052 
 
 1. (U)  Poloff delivered reftel A talking points to GODR 
Foreign Ministry Head of the International Organizations, 
Ambassador Rhadys Abreu de Polanco.  Ambassador Abreu had no 
immediate response.  Embassy Santo Domingo held a CTAG 
meeting on February 6, 2004 (reftel B), we do not plan to 
hold another meeting before the April 16 CTAG meeting in 
Washington, D.C.  Any substantive response to reftel A 
talking points will be reported septel. 
KUBISKE 
"
"15812","4/7/2004 21:00","04SANTODOMINGO2186","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 002186 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR S/CPR, WHA, WHA/CAR; DHS ATTN VIP TRAVEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPDC, OTRA, OVIP, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC PRESIDENT TRAVELS TO MIAMI AND 
NEW YORK, APRIL 10 TO 12 
 
 
1.  Embassy has received Diplomatic Note DVP 8445 from the 
Secretariat of State for Foreign Relations of the Dominican 
 
SIPDIS 
Republic advising of President Hipolito Mejia\'s travel plans 
to Miami and New York April 10 through the 12 and requesting 
proper airspace and landing permissions.  Attached to the Dip 
Note were the details for the airplane that would transport 
President Mejia and his official party.  Airplane details and 
unofficial translation of Dip Note follow. 
 
AIRPLANE DETAILS 
 
2.  FALCON 2000, Tail Number N-201-CR.  Pilots: FRANCISCO 
GARCIA and ROBIN PENA. 
 
3.  The airplane will depart San Isidro Air Base at 7:00 a.m. 
on April 10 and arrive at Opa-locka International Airport, 
Miami, the same day.  On April 11, the airplane departs Miami 
and arrives in La Guardia International Airport, New York. 
The airplane, with passengers and crew, returns to the 
Dominican Republic on April 12. 
 
UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION OF DIP NOTE DVP 8445: 
 
4.  The Secretariat of State for Foreign Relations presents 
its compliments to the Embassy of the United States of 
America, and has the honor of sending the attached details of 
the airplane that will transport His Excellency Mr. President 
of the Republic, Hipolito Mejia, and his official party, to 
the cities of Miami and New York, from the 10 to the 12 of 
April, 2004, in which it hopes to solicit airspace and 
landing permissions before the corresponding authorities. 
(complimentary close) 
 
ACTION REQUEST 
 
5.  Embassy requests all approprite courtesies for President 
Mejia and party. 
KUBISKE 
"
"15839","4/8/2004 17:41","04SANTODOMINGO2223","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO745","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 002223 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), WHA/PPSC, EB/OMA; 
TREASURY FOR LLAMONICA, RTOLOUI; DHS PASS MIAMI FOR 
RFUENTES; DHS ALSO FOR CIS - CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, PGOV, PREL, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN BANKING SERIES #5; BANINTER/BANCREDITO 
IN THE NEWS AND IN THE CAMPAIGNS 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 00745 
 
1.  (SBU)  This is cable # 5 in a periodic series on the 
banking sector in the Dominican Republic.  Sensitive but 
unclassified, entire text. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
BANINTER and Bancredito Back in the News and in the 
Campaigns 
 
Presidential candidates are trading barbs over 
responsibility for the massive Baninter fraud and the 
defendants are lashing out against President Mejia\'s 
party.  The Government filed civil suit in Miami on March 
26.  The Dominican Supreme Court has dismissed defense 
efforts to impugn the examining judge, so the case begins 
to grind forward again.  Defendants in the Bancredito case 
are targeted by an increasing number of criminal complaints 
filed by defrauded depositors. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
---------- 
Baez and Alvarez Renta Launch Counterattacks against 
President\'s Party 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
---------- 
 
The huge Baninter banking fraud case is making headlines 
again in the Dominican Republic.  The most recent volley 
was fired by the defense team of Ramon Baez Figueroa, which 
filed a criminal suit on March 31 against prominent PRD 
party members (PPH faction) alleging extortion and misuse 
of public office.  Baez\'s attorneys claim that current PRD 
campaign manager Eligio Jaquez, then Secretary of 
Agriculture, along with two other PPH members, received RD 
pesos 15 million in Baninter funds in the form of a 
fraudulent loan. That loan went to fund the initiative for 
constitutional reform that resulted in an amendment to 
electoral law, allowing President Mejia to run for a second 
term in office. 
 
The defense team struck again on April 2, announcing to the 
press that they would accuse presidential advisor Hernani 
Salazar of taking a payment of RD 30 million pesos at the 
same time.  They say that economic advisor Andy Dauhajre 
accepted USD 300,000 for his Foundation for Economy and 
Development.  They say that after Easter week they will 
reveal more about \"Emperor Malkun\" (Central Bank Governor 
Lois Malkun) \"as a leading member of the perverse 
conspiracy\" against Baez Figueroa and about a former 
Central Bank Governor (presumably current Foreign Minister 
Guerrero Prats).  One paper says that they will accuse Vice 
Governor Felix Calvo of accepting funds from Baninter. 
 
Meanwhile, Luis Alvarez Renta\'s defense team was busy 
placing full page ads in the local dailies proclaiming his 
innocence and damning the Central Bank.  The \"innocence 
campaign\" comes on the heels of local coverage of the law 
suit filed March 26 in the Southern District of Florida by 
the GODR (in the form of the Liquidation Commission of 
Banco Intercontinental, S.A.) alleging Alvarez Renta 
committed civil violations of the Racketeer Influenced and 
Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO) and fraudulent 
transactions under Florida state law. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
BANINTER as a Political \"Hot Potato\" 
-------------------------------------- 
 
The Baez Figueroa lawsuit makes good on his defense team\'s 
threat to publish information potentially damaging to 
President Mejia.  Mejia first mentioned Baninter as a 
campaign issue two weeks ago when he stated publicly that 
current presidential front runner and former president, 
Leonel Fernandez, must have been aware of irregularities 
within the Bank during his term in office.  The Baez 
lawsuit answers, at least in part, Mejia\'s banter with the 
press, challenging anybody with damaging information 
related to Baninter to come forward with it.  Jaquez is 
trying to take the spotlight off the President, saying that 
the RD $ 15 million loan that is the subject of the 
complaint, was a loan to him, used for PRD activity, and 
that he has regularly been repaying it. 
Interior Minister Pedro Franco Badia called the 
pro-government daily Listin Diario on April 1 and waved a 
copy of a 1999-2000 report on Baninter done by a financial 
consulting firm and delivered to Fernandez\'s Central Bank 
Governor Hector Valdez Albizu and the Banking 
Superintendent Vicente Bengoa Albizu.  Franco Badia read 
aloud from the conclusions, \"The Bank has a highly 
concentrated portfolio of risks, with 150 debtors 
representing 75.5 percent of the commercial lending, 
substantially increasing the level of risk. . The bank is 
losing funds to the extent that its capital is eroding ten 
percent per year.\"  Badia asserted that the analysts 
suggested that, in its dire circumstances, the bank should 
elect either to provide a straightforward accounting of its 
situation or as a temporizing measure should use an 
artificial presentation of the data suggesting more 
liquidity than actually existed. \"In either case,\" he read, 
\"we face the sure demise of the bank\" (\"estamos ante la 
cronica de una muerte anunciada\"). Franco Badia challenged 
Fernandez to explain the \"millions of pesos\" received by 
Fernandez\'s Fundacion Global -- \"to show you that it was 
enough just to press a single button, when the Foundation\'s 
account was opened in Baninter, Fernandez received more 
than 60 million pesos through Luis Manuel Casado.\" 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
Alvarez Renta Pointing the Finger at the Central Bank 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
In the Baninter background are the maneuverings of Luis 
Alvarez Renta.  The Miami based law firm of Tew Cardenas, 
on behalf of the Dominican Government, filed a civil suit 
against Alvarez Renta on March 26th.  When word of the suit 
made the press in the Dominican Republic, Alvarez Renta\'s 
defense team went on the offensive, publishing ads saying 
in part, \"Once again the officials of the Central 
Bank...want to condemn Luis Alvarez Renta in the press, 
causing irreparable harm to his public image.\"  One 
interesting aspect of his \"innocence ads\" is his statement 
that, \"We trust in our (Dominican) judicial system.\"  This 
is the first time we have heard anybody say that they trust 
in the Dominican judicial system. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Judge Cleared to Continue Investigation 
----------------------------------------- 
 
Perhaps the most important decision in the Baninter 
criminal case in the Dominican Republic took place with 
little fanfare.  The Dominican Supreme Court ruled against 
the Baez Figueroa petition to remove the judge of 
instruction from the case.  By ruling against Baez 
Figueroa, the court allows the criminal case against him, 
Alvarez Renta, Marcos Baez Cocco, and Lilian Castillo to 
move forward.  Judge Ortiz Sanchez is now free to resume 
his daunting task of compiling evidence and preparing a 
bench memo on the criminal charges against the Baninter 
principals.  Once Judge Ortiz Sanchez completes the fact 
finding stage of the case, it will pass to a judge or a 
judicial panel for trial. 
 
Baez Figueroa\'s defense team has asked that its criminal 
complaint against the PPH members be attached to the 
original Baninter criminal case and assigned to Judge Ortiz 
Sanchez.  No ruling has been made on that request to date. 
Because the underlying facts and players in both cases 
would be the same, attaching the PPH case to the Baninter 
case would make sense.  However, it would slow down the 
Baninter case, perhaps delaying prosecution once again. 
 
-------------------------------- 
BANCREDITO Takes Another Path 
-------------------------------- 
 
Far less prevalent in the press, but nevertheless moving 
forward at a steady pace, are claims against the former 
executives of Bancredito.  In early March, Central Bank 
attorneys and officials gave testimony to the judge of 
instruction in the case.  The original Bancredito criminal 
case filed by the Central Bank, which was delayed by the 
Attorney General\'s refusal to file the complaint, was only 
the first case opened against Bancredito executives.  Since 
then, at least ten other criminal complaints against the 
former executives have been filed with the coordinating 
judicial administrator by various depositors in the failed 
bank, despite the negative opinion of the Santo Domingo 
District Attorney.  In addition to naming former Bancredito 
President Manuel Arturo Pellerano and Vice President Juan 
Felipe Mendoza (subjects of the first criminal case), the 
new complaints implicate patriarch Maximo Pellerano and 27 
Dominican businesses, including major Dominican firms in 
the Pellerano group involved in telecommunications, banking 
and insurance. 
 
Bancredito took another hit when, for the second time, its 
petition for injunction was denied.  Bancredito attorneys 
had asked the court to suspend two Monetary Board 
resolutions that Bancredito claimed were damaging its 
interests.  Passed in October 2003 and February 2004, these 
resolutions directed that certificates of deposit issued by 
Grupo Financiero Nacional (a Bancredito related entity) 
would not be guaranteed by the Central Bank.  The denial of 
injunctive relief means that remaining Bancredito assets 
may continue to be subject to law suits and criminal 
complaints from those who feel they have been defrauded or 
robbed.  In other words, the door is open for even more 
actions against former Bancredito executives and companies 
owned, in whole or in part, by Bancredito. 
 
-------------------- 
Action and Comment 
-------------------- 
 
The Ambassador and emboffs continue to urge our contacts at 
all levels to press forward with prosecutions in the 
Dominican Republic against Baninter and Bancredito 
officials.  The Ambassador again delivered anti-corruption 
messages in well attended speeches on February 25 to the 
Santo Domingo chapter of the American Chamber of Commerce 
and on March 19 the Dominican Diplomatic School.  The USAID 
Director has taken advantage of a series of anti-corruption 
events for presidential candidates to spell out the USG 
position and urge Dominicans to fight corruption in the 
banks, in the courthouses and throughout society.  The DCM 
and other emboffs raise banking fraud as an example of 
corruption and institutional weakness and urge action 
against it. 
 
The emergence of the Baninter case as a political issue in 
the upcoming presidential elections gives the Dominican 
Republic another reminder to do the right thing.  The 
criminal case, stalled since December, is now back on the 
rails.  The example of the U.S. based case, even though it 
is a civil action, raises the stakes.  The Dominican 
judicial system has an abysmal track record on fraud and 
corruption, but recent events give us hope that the 
Baninter case may actually go to trial some day. 
 
2.  Drafted by Angela Kerwin. 
 
3.  This report and others in the series are available on 
the classified SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/  along with 
extensive other material. 
 
 
HERTELL 
"
"15906","4/12/2004 19:23","04SANTODOMINGO2263","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 002263 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTIONS #35: WHAT THIS ELECTION IS NOT 
ABOUT 
 
 
1. (SBU)  The following is #35 in our series on the Dominican 
presidential elections: 
Elections # 35 - What It\'s NOT About 
In the Dominican presidential elections set for May 16, none 
of the leading political parties believes in blaming the 
United States for Dominican woes or sees any advantage in 
setting forth positions at odds with ours.  For example, here 
are some of the topics that this election is NOT about: 
- -  A free trade agreement with the United States. 
Secretary of Industry and Commerce Sonia Guzman and  USTR 
 
SIPDIS 
Robert Zoellick announced the agreement on March 15.   The 
March 26 PLD program, drafted in earlier months, promises 
simply &to continue negotiations toward a free trade 
agreement with the United States.8  Despite the complexity 
of the agreement and the potential tidal wave of its impact 
on government finances and the real economy, no one of 
consequence has opposed it.  Yes, distinguished &El Caribe8 
commentator Bernardo Vega just wrote a rueful piece about the 
eventual demise of the Dominican rice sector.  But the only 
really sour commentator has been Frederico Cuello, Mejia,s 
previous ambassador to the WTO (yanked because he could not 
get with the program).  Cuello warned that Dominican 
producers would be overwhelmed by American exports, that 
China would raffle up any advantages in apparel, and that 
Dominicans should be stalwart with Brazil against the U.S. 
During the final round he even implied darkly that Dominican 
negotiators were in the pay of United States interests.  No 
one has listened to him. 
- - Dominican troops in Iraq. The Dominican armed forces are 
currently training a second six-month relief for the 
\"Quisqueya\" battalion.  A new contingent would arrive at just 
about the same time as the August 16 presidential 
inauguration.  Mejia,s presidential opponents have not 
questioned Dominican participation, not even last week with 
Dominican troops under fire or when a Salvadoran soldier was 
killed.  The PLD platform notes the difficult situation in 
Iraq but does not reject U.S. policy.  After Easter mass 
Dominican Cardinal Nicolas de Jesus Lopez Rodriguez commented 
to an El Caribe journalist, \"Our poor soldiers, I would like 
to see them come back as soon as possible.\"  In response, 
Mejia told reporters in New York yesterday,\"The agreement 
with the U.S. government lasts through July. We are allies of 
the United States.  In June we,ll see what happens\" 
Opposition parties have not commented. 
- - The tough medicine prescribed by the IMF..  In 
unaccustomed fashion, Dominicans appear to have accepted that 
they got themselves into the current financial mess and that 
they will have to endure the cure.  Presidential candidates 
blame one another for errors of commission or omission, 
opening a rich and entertaining exchange among the scribbling 
classes on the effects of corruption.  Occasionally a wishful 
financial type calls for dollarization of the economy.  No 
one has revealed that the USG politely declined Dominican 
suggestions of a $300 million bridge loan or a long-term 
billion-dollar loan to restructure the tottering burden of 
Central Bank debt.  Discussions of finances mention the 
United States only occasionally, chiefly when someone hopes 
U.S. courts will do the Dominicans, job for them on 
prosecuting bank fraud. 
- - The United States and its ambassador.  Over the past 70 
years of Dominican history the personal representative of the 
U.S. President has often served, like the papal nuncio, as a 
decisive counterweight to the &Jefe8 currently in the 
presidency.  Dominicans well recall the U.S. marines in 1965 
and U.S. involvement in securing a resolution to the 
corrupted 1994 presidential election.    President Mejia has 
forthright pro-U.S. policies and an evident appreciation of 
the Ambassador. None of the political parties has questioned 
the advisability of close relations with the United States. 
The PLD platform advocates closer alignment with CARICOM and 
with the developing countries of the &Group of 218 from 
trade talks in Monterrey, but these are only nuances.  During 
an early March visit to Washington Leonel Fernandez advocated 
publicly and privately for even closer USG involvement in 
election monitoring.  As for the Ambassador himself, the 
country,s leading daily &El Caribe,8 generally sympathetic 
to the PLD, ran an editorial last December praising him for 
his &dignity, prudence, impartiality and stature8 and 
commenting, &These qualities are evident to all, along with 
his certainty that his government will watch over the 
transparency of the elections this coming year.8 
 
 And  in fact, in contrast with other countries across the 
hemisphere, almost none of the fringe groups purport to be 
anti-Yanqui.  The allure of the United States and all things 
(north) American remains a constant in the Dominican 
Republic. 
 
2. (U)  Drafted by Michael Meigs. 
 
3. (U)  This piece and other election reporting is available 
on the SIPRNET site 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ index.cfm along 
with extensive other material. 
HERTELL 
"
"15942","4/13/2004 21:43","04SANTODOMINGO2294","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 11 SANTO DOMINGO 002294 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTIONS #36: THE PLD PLATFORM, IN 
BRIEF 
 
 
1. (SBU)  Following is no. 36 in our series on the Dominican 
elections. 
 
Dominican Elections #36: The PLD Platform, in Brief 
 
Leonel Fernandez\'s Partido de Liberacion Dominicana is the 
only one of three parties to have produced a formal election 
platform.  The full text in Spanish is available either on 
the PLD website 
(http://www.pld.org.do/02-documentos/programa 2004.pdf) or on 
our SIPRNET site 
(http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ ).  Following 
is our precis in English of the 150-page document. A precis 
of the precis:  the PLD takes a socially conscious 
market-friendly approach to government, trusting in rational 
analysis and moral values.  And though the cover is in 
vibrant PLD gold-and-purple, the major chapters are headed by 
warm pencil-drawn graphics. 
 
2. (U)  Begin precis: 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - 
 
                              THE PLD PLATFORM 
 
PLD PROGRAM 
 
Presentation by Leonel Fernandez 
My administration sought to reduce unemployment and poverty 
while improving institutions, respect for civil rights and a 
nation of laws.  We persevered despite the systematic and 
irrational efforts of the opposition and the 
opposition-dominated Congress.  History since 2000 shows that 
our orientation was correct.  Logic and analysis demonstrate 
this; we should thank God that the past four years of PRD 
permit us to make the comparison. 
 
The PLD has grown and matured in the interval; unlike other 
parties, it has carried out its internal processes in model 
fashion, with no crisis.  Members of the party showed 
themselves capable in the first PLD administration; and we 
have obtained a level of organization and coherency that sets 
us apart from others.  We offer, humbly, our experience and 
our desire to serve. 
 
The PLD when elected will reinitiate the process of 
institutionalization and modernization.  In the midst of 
crisis we will represent the people with dignity and decorum, 
confident that they and the country still have moral fiber 
and the ability to renew themselves. 
 
Hundreds of individuals have collaborated on this party 
platform, conscious of their responsibilities.  Taken 
together, it is a work strategy and the formal presentation 
of an engagement for which we seek the support of all 
Dominicans concerned in the future of their children and of 
the country. 
 
General Lines 
 
The Dominican Republic is currently in the most difficult 
moment of its history.  Since 2000 the PRD has initiated a 
process of progressive deterioration causing crisis, 
uncertainty, despair and discouragement.  The PRD government 
was inept in handling public expenditure, prejudicing 
savings, and showed ineffective management and 
administration.  Comparative statistics bear this out. 
 
Public finances are under pressure because of high levels of 
public debt taken on by the PRD; the impact of the 
quasi-fiscal (Central Bank) debt on fiscal goals; and 
excessive public employment, which will absorb more than 30 
percent of revenue in 2004.  The PLD says that public debt is 
57 percent of GDP.  Despite tax increases, the PRD government 
has not restrained expenditures and so has not increased 
savings.  The PRD opted for a policy of increasing public 
debt.  The planned fiscal reform must include both tax 
changes and expenditure reductions. 
 
The financial &hole8 was created by rumors, a banking 
liquidity crisis, &profound and serious irregularities in 
Baninter,8 other banks with administrative and accounting 
problems, disrespect for banking norms, excessive advances 
and rediscounts by the Central Bank beyond the legal limits. 
Central Bank debt has grown to unsustainable levels.  Banking 
supervision is insufficient and non-transparent, creating 
vulnerability to bank fraud. 
 
Exchange rate policy has been erratic and often misguided. 
The peso has lost much of its value, reflecting a crisis of 
confidence and excessive monetary issue. 
 
The cost of living rose 88 percent over 3  years of PRD 
administration. 
 
Management of the electricity sector was irresponsible, 
complicated by devaluation and plagued by payment delays  and 
a $450 debt to generators at the end of 2003.  The 
government,s contradictory role as regulator and actor in 
the market for generation, transmission and distribution has 
caused distortions. 
 
These factors have raised the poverty level and reduced the 
level of human development.  Public services have 
deteriorated, particularly in education, due to the PRD,s 
clientism and waste of state resources, including through 
corruption.  Institutions have been greatly weakened. 
 
IMF negotiations are outlined, as well as macroeconomic 
externalities.  The post-September 11 global emphasis on 
security reduced the role of  the international community in 
seeking solutions and protecting international norms such as 
sovereign equality and non-intervention.  Multilateralism is 
still active, however.  Third world groupings such as the 
&Group of 218 led by Brazil, India, South Africa and China, 
constitute an emerging new axis of political and economic 
power.  The &Washington consensus8 of the 1990,s on 
orthodox economic management was insufficient in itself to 
create sufficient growth.  The PLD and others are meditating 
on the need for more inclusive global policies, with a human 
face and development-oriented.  The fight against world 
poverty isa priority. 
 
Challenges 
 
Four principal ones exist: 
1.    Recovering macroeconomic stability and resumption of 
growth; 
2.    Consolidate democratic governability by strengthening 
basic institutions 
3.    Improving competitiveness nationallhy and 
internationally; and 
4.    Achieving a better level of social equity for Dominican 
society. 
Aims include: 
- - Renegotiating internal and external debt through dialogue 
so as to make government finances viable. 
- - Strengthening institutions 
- - Modernizing productive sectors, industrial and 
agricultural 
- - Achieving financial sustainability of the electricity 
sector 
- - Creation of jobs through growth, aided by correct 
policies. 
- - Consolidation of business conditions favorable to 
entrepreneurship. 
- - Carrying out social policies to protect individuals and 
provide opportunity for all ) employment creation, 
strengthening production, bettering education and training 
- - Restructuring government expenditure toward social 
programs, with changes to make them more effective. 
- - Improving education, including through public-private 
partnerships and stressing excellence. 
- - Following social policy with a long-term vision that 
rises above the current administration and allows a gradual 
weaning from clientism and electoral populism. 
- - Achieving transparent government, limiting discretion in 
interpreting laws and regulations, and acting honestly 
 
Vision of a Development Model 
 
The PLD advocates a social model of the marketplace, with 
greater solidarity for the least developed Dominicans and a 
defined, clear and focused fight against poverty. 
 
\"A democratic and social state of laws will not be an 
opponent of the market, but will move alongside the market, 
joining the private sector and civil society in promoting the 
changes needed to confront the challenges of the present and 
future . . . which requires modern management with qualified 
personnel and agile, transparent administrative procedures to 
prevent corruption, inefficiency and theft.\" 
 
Politics of the State and Institutions 
 
Reform and modernization of the state and society is the 
general goal.  The fragile democracy developed since the 
death of Trujillo in 1961 tends to be more authoritarian than 
participatory, based charismatic leadership, social 
inequality, and weak values.  Further democratization, a 
central role for civil society, greater institutionalization 
and respect for citizens, rights, and more citizen 
participation are in order.   The state must plan a strategy 
leading toward a society that is dignified, equitable, and 
democratic. 
 
Political Reform 
 
Needed strengthening of democratic institutions and 
participation will depend on creating a new 
legal-institutional framework and encouraging a new mode of 
citizen behavior. 
 
Political Parties 
 
- - Improve citizen representation and participation 
- - Encourage internal democratization and better 
qualification of personnel 
- - Encourage more responsible behavior by leaders to propose 
solutions to the country,s problems 
Electoral System 
 
 - - Strengthen the electoral system to eliminate partisan 
bias and ensure elections that follow the rules and 
democratic procedures 
- - Select the judges and staff of the Central Electoral 
Tribunal (JCE) with the active participation of political 
parties and civil society 
 
Constitutional Reform 
 
- - Through a Constituent Assembly, thoroughly revise the 
constitution to be modern, developmentalist, democratic, and 
participatory, reaffirming the rule of law 
- - Include institutional, economic, social, and political 
changes demanded by society 
 
Reform of Public Administration 
 
- - Change from a bureaucratic model to a management model of 
providing public services to citizens 
- - Reorganize public administration to eliminate duplication 
and waste 
- - Train and professionalize public employees 
- - Instill transparency and ethics according to 
international norms 
- - Strengthen development planning to ensure efficiency and 
citizen input 
- - Develop an improvement program for public services to 
guarantee their quality, low cost, and continuity 
 
Reform of the Presidency of the Republic 
 
- - Redefine the functions of the Presidency to eliminate 
excessively centralized power and adopt a more modern 
collective decision model for the government 
- - Create technical support capability for programming and 
management functions 
- - Encourage creation of permanent coordination mechanisms 
with other government agencies, the business sector, and 
civil society organizations 
 
Reform of  the Legislative Branch 
 
- - Institutionally strengthen the Congress to serve as an 
effective counterweight to the over-powerful executive 
- - Stimulate legislators, accountability to society and 
transparency in their actions 
- - Promote more effective dialogue, representation, and 
oversight by the National Congress 
 
Reform of the Judicial Branch 
 
- - Deepen the reforms since 1996, to make the judicial 
system democratic and efficient and judges, prosecutors, and 
other officials more independent and conscious of their role 
in society, and to provide full access to all citizens 
 
Municipal Reform 
 
- - Promote gradual territorial and administrative 
decentralization, with political, economic, and social 
effects on local communities 
- - Promote political, financial, fiscal, and administrative 
autonomy for local governments, in line with the needs of 
local development 
- -Consolidate decentralized public institutions establishing 
new relations between citizens, social groups, and their 
local territories 
 
Reform of the Private Sector 
 
- - Promote cooperative and complementary relations between 
Government and Marketplace 
- - Stimulate social and environmental responsibility on the 
part of businesses 
- - Encourage competitive practices that allow equal 
opportunities for all 
- - Facilitate via the government access for the private 
sector to technology, modern administrative practices, and 
information sources useful for development 
 
Reform of Civil Society 
 
- -Promote the habit of responsible participation by civil 
society organizations to deepen democratization of the State 
and society 
- - Establish regulations that permit development of civil 
society activities 
 
Management of Government Reform 
 
- - Prepare an \"integral reform plan\" during the transition 
period with detailed proposals for the four-year term 
- - Establish priorities through dialogue, emphasizing 
demands for betterpublic services, more transparency, and 
more citizen participation in public affiars 
- -Establish a single agency to coordinate reform and 
appropriate communications mechanisms and strategies to 
improve effectiveness of reforms 
- - Submit to Congress a package of necessary legal reforms 
- - Make the budget process, in particular for 2005, an 
instrument of reform, adopting mechanisms such as management 
contracts and assessment of results 
- -Organize dialogue with international institutions to raise 
the effectiveness of external assistance to the Dominican 
Republic to promote reforms 
 
 
International Relations 
 
The platform aims in general terms to return to an active, 
efficient and systematic approach to foreign policy.  It 
criticizes the current government for a \"significant 
deterioration\" in foreign policy.  The over-reaching goals 
include defense of territorial integrity and identity; 
defense and consolidation of \"national sovereignty\" in the 
face of globalization; and reintegration into the 
international scene with the objective of strengthening 
democratic governance and economic and social development of 
the country.  Objectives and strategies are provided, in 
order, for foreign relations with: 1) Haiti, 2) the United 
States, 3) Latin America and the Caribbean, 4) Europe, 5) 
Spain, and 6) the rest of the world. 
 
Specific Aims: 
 
Haiti: 
     To work towards permanent and strong diplomatic 
relations with Haiti characterized by mutual responsibility, 
respect, and efficiency; 
     To continue the policy of encouraging the international 
community to support and stand with Haiti; 
 
United States: 
     To sustain a policy of mutual respect and continuing 
collaboration in the areas of economics, politics, 
environment, culture, among various other themes. 
     To continue negotiating a U.S.-Dominican bilateral free 
trade agreement. 
     To comply with and strengthen various bilateral 
treaties and accords in order to improve security in the 
hemisphere and encourage cultural, scientific, technological 
and sports exchanges. 
 
Latin America and the Caribbean: 
     To improve political, economic, commercial and cultural 
relations, especially in the Caribbean and Central America. 
     To foster the development of the possibility of a 
commercial accord between the Dominican Republic and CARICOM, 
strengthening the ties of the states in the region through 
commercial and cultural exchanges. 
 
Europe 
     To increase relations with the European Union, 
especially in the areas of international policy, tourism, 
investment, commerce, technical cooperation, training and 
cultural exchanges. 
 
Spain 
     To strengthen bilateral ties in the areas of commerce, 
cooperation and technological and academic exchanges. 
 
Over-reaching goals 
 
     To return to an active, efficient and systematic 
foreign policy. 
     To defend and consolidate the National Sovereignty in 
the face of a globalized new world order. 
     Defend territorial integrity and identity and respect 
international treaties, accords and conventions. 
     To reinsert the DR on the international scene. 
 
Economic Policies 
 
The PLD introduces its economic platform by blaming the PRD 
for losing the economic stability and sustained growth 
achieved during the Fernandez government -- under the PRD 
unemployment has risen, government spending has accelerated 
with an unchecked policy of internal and external borrowing, 
and the PRD mismanaged the banking crisis, all of which led 
to \"negative performance during these last years.\"  The 
platform lists broad, ambitious objectives and delineates 
strategies.  Strategies generally are broad objectives, most 
of them without specifics.  Topics are macroeconomic policy, 
the industrial sector, tourism, agriculture, and sugar. 
 
Macroeconomics 
 
The macroeconomic policy calls for fiscal austerity, tax 
reform, sustainable debt, strict monetary policy, and a 
market-based exchange rate --but makes only veiled reference 
to the IMF standby agreement. 
 
Trade 
On trade, the PLD calls for increased competitiveness and 
continuation of the competitiveness program initiated under 
Mejia.  Similarly, on tariffs, the platform sets an objective 
of establishing a regimen of tariffs &adjusted to the 
situation of openness.8 The PLD proposes to reintegrate the 
country into CARICOM,s &regional negotiating machinery8 
while renewing strategic alliances and guarding the interests 
of small economies in all trade negotiating forums. 
 
Other Aims of the Economic Platform: 
 
     Implement policies that encourage the return of capital 
and investment; 
     Apply monetary and fiscal policies conducive to stable 
internal prices, a stable exchange rate and stable interest 
rates; 
     Increase tax collections; 
     Establish a system of efficiency indicators for social 
spending -- especially in health and education; 
     Limit the growth of debt stock to the level of GDP 
growth; 
     Authorize issuance of new sovereign bonds so as to roll 
over current bond issues; 
     Strengthen the office of the Technical Secretary to 
manage international resources; 
     Improve the efficiency of the National Office of 
Industrial Property (ONAPI) in issuance of\"trademarks, 
commercial names, and inventions\"; 
     Diversify free trade zones and initiate links with the 
domestic productive sector to increase competitiveness of 
domestic industries; 
     Improve quality, infrastructure, and environmental 
safeguards to become a leader in the tourism sector; 
     For agriculture, establish information exchange 
mechanism on prices and production; assure domestic 
production of food staples, improve technology, and remove 
barriers that create distortions (except for those that 
protect certain products under commercial agreements); and 
     revamp outdated sugar laws and exclude sugar from all 
trade negotiations for sufficient time to rehabilitate the 
sector 
 
Environment 
 
The PLD environment platform notes that the country has 
largely moved from a rural society to an urban one, so 
previous economic development models don,t meet the needs of 
a continually growing population.  The PLD asserts its modern 
vision for administering the State is based on the 
government,s ethical contract with the people and a social 
obligation to identify a development model that meets the 
country,s capacity and potential as a society.  PLD 
proposals cover deforestation, destruction of coastal marine 
ecosystems, loss of biodiversity, the contamination of water 
resources and general environmental degradation.   The PLD 
criticizes the current administration for failing to 
implement or abide by (environmental) Law 64-00, passed 
during the Fernandez Administration.  The PLD will seek the 
rational use of resources and the development and 
strengthening of the national system of protected areas.  The 
PLD says it will also reduce environmental pollution and 
establish an institutional framework of participative 
management. 
 
Other Aims: 
     Urge decentralization of environmental measures, toward 
local municipalities through establishment and development of 
a National System of Environmental Management and of natural 
resources; 
     Reform the Constitution to require sustainable 
management of natural resources and the environment; 
     Promote establishment of a right to enjoy a healthy 
natural environment; 
     Take the necessary measures to organize the Secretariat 
of the Environment and Natural resources in a manner that 
complies with Law 64-00 -- and adhere to other provisions in 
the law; 
     Abide by international conventions and other 
commitments undertaken by the state and urge passage of 
legislation where necessary; 
     Engage civil society in environmental management; 
     Promote the reduction and recycling of solid wastes; 
     Adopt clean productive technologies; 
     Establish a framework to monitor the environment in 
selected areas of the largest population centers by 2006; 
     Develop alternatives to reduce the use of 
agrochemicals; and 
     Implement soil and water management technologies; 
 
Energy 
 
The PLD,s energy platform consists of three sub-sectors: 
electricity, fuel and alternative energy. 
 
The PLD introduces its energy platform by asserting that 
during its tenure, it confronted the grave problems of the 
electrical sub-sector by working simultaneously in two areas: 
meeting inherited short-term problems by adding 1000 
megawatts of new and rehabilitated generating capacity; and 
seeking private sector participation in the generation and 
distribution of electricity.  The PLD says the PRD 
politicized the privatization (\"capitalization\") process; 
instead of making necessary adjustments, the Mejia 
administration undertook \"counter-reform,\" by signing the 
Madrid Accords (under which the GODR guaranteed negotiated 
tariff rates to the generators), and through the re-purchase 
of  shares in national electricity distribution companies 
held by Spanish company Union Fenosa.  The PLD alleges that 
bad PRD energy policy and currency depreciation (due to PRD 
policies) have brought the sector to the point of collapse. 
The PLD lists re-privatization of the distribution companies 
as an objective. 
 
Infrastructure 
 
The infrastructure platform addresses public works, transit 
and transportation and telecommunications. 
 
In the area of public works, the PLD promises to eliminate 
political irregularities, define priorities and elicit 
private sector participation.  In transportation the PLD 
assures the rights of citizens to have access to a system of 
transport that is efficient, safe, and reliable.  For 
telecommunications, the PLD asserts that the current 
regulatory body is inadequate and unrepresentative -- it 
lacks balance and the multi-disciplinary knowledge required 
to regulate a sector in need of innovation and  legal, 
financial, technical decisions. 
 
Aims: 
     Strengthen the role of the electricity regulator; 
     Strive to repay the debt in the sector; 
     Conclude the process of converting the independent 
power producers to merchant plants that sell on the spot 
market; 
     Establish a cost-based tariff; 
     Guarantee just treatment of users of electrical 
services; 
     Create a Fuels Superintendency; 
     Encourage the use of alternative energy resources; 
     Define a policy for priorities in infrastructure 
development based on development plans; 
     Resolve the institutional disorder created by the 
dispersion of many institutions with similar functions and 
the same level of hierarchy; and 
     Redesign the telecom regulatory body so that its 
composition reflects the many disciplines required to take 
decisions in a sector of this nature. 
 
 
 
 
Social Policies 
 
The PLD says that civil society,s \"intervention\"in the 
democratic process is a fairly recent phenomenon, 
demonstrating mistrust and questioning of excessive and 
exclusionary behavior by political parties and the state. 
There is no clear differentiation between corporate interest 
organizations (national or international) and the civic 
organizations representing communities and society at large. 
 
Aims: 
 
     Promote responsible civil society participation in 
order to deepen democratization of the state and of society 
in general; 
     Stimulate a regulatory system that allows for the 
development and consolidation of civil society actions; 
     Encourage discussion of a Law on Social Participation 
to assure the widest participation possible of civil society 
organizations; 
     Regulate NGO activities by establishing mechanisms for 
accounting for the origin and use of funds; 
     Promote financial support for NGO social programs as 
part of the fight against poverty; and 
     Support programs that encourage institutional capacity 
of NGOs. 
 
 
Human Rights and Public Security 
 
The centrist and bureaucratic Dominican government provides 
inadequate security because responsibilities are divided and 
uncoordinated.  The government has traditionally relied on 
the police force principally for control and social/political 
discipline.  The history of human rights abuses demonstrates 
the inability of the police as currently managed to protect 
and serve.  State institutions and the people should be 
committed to ensuring quality of life for all and a 
functioning democracy. 
 
Aims: 
 
     Encourage the transformation of the National Police 
into a public security force with moral authority to protect 
society, to develop professionalism and to overcome negative 
perceptions of incompetence and repressive force; 
     Provide protection and public security to reduce 
criminality without putting at risk individual rights, due 
process or rule of law; 
     Support the application of the new Criminal Procedures 
Code and the Public Ministry Career Statute; 
     Promote the application of the new Police Reform Law; 
     Create a National Institute for Security and Criminal 
Policy dedicated to studies and analyses of the Dominican 
public security situation; 
     Establish an information system to keep track of 
offenses committed in various police stations, poor 
neighborhoods and provinces; and 
     Centralize authority and control of prisons into one 
institution by creating a Police Penitentiary Agency. 
 
Social Policies 
 
Poverty and the unequal distribution of wealth are the 
principle threats to social integration..  The indicators of 
societal downturn are evident, including but not limited to 
malnutrition, an increase in endemic diseases, high infant 
and maternal mortality rates and rising illiteracy rates. 
Current social conditions require better government policies. 
 The government,s main instrument the budget; increasing 
social expenditures will improve conditions.   The 
platform,s social policies are broad in scope and cover the 
following themes: population and development, vulnerable 
populations (the disabled, children and adolescents, the 
elderly), women,s issues, Dominicans living abroad, social 
security, education and health. 
 
Aims: 
 
     Assure the efficiency, rationale and focus of public 
spending for social programs; 
     Increase international funding for programs on 
education, health and sanitation; 
     Promote access to a quality education for all 
Dominicans regardless of socio-economic class and geographic 
regions; 
     Guarantee basic social services to children and 
adolescents, especially those in vulnerable situations; 
     Promote women,s employment in nontraditional 
occupations; 
     Reduce domestic violence and improve application of the 
Law Against Domestic Violence; 
     Launch a national campaign targeting women about 
HIV/AIDS and prevention; 
     Establish and strengthen implementation mechanisms for 
the new Law Against Trafficking and Alien Smuggling and other 
laws protecting women; 
     Create the necessary conditions for better access to 
low-cost health care; 
     Develop a pension system that will prevent the loss or 
reduction in wages in retirement. 
 
Defense and National Security 
 
There is no National Security law and the existing Armed 
Forces Law is inadequate.  With no national defense policy it 
is difficult to elaborate doctrine and strategies, the size 
of the armed forces, or the participation in international 
events.  The society has no discussed reform and 
modernization of the forces or influenced them about their 
role in defense and democracy.  Training is inadequate for 
duties and functions.  Military education has little to do 
with national needs.  Benefits are granted on a personal 
rather than an inistitutional basis.  Budgeting is improvised 
and heavily influenced by the personal interest of 
administrators and financial managers.  Supply is deficient. 
The military apply rules of engagement for war when called on 
to deal with street disturbances.  There is no planning but 
rather constant improvisation. 
 
Aims: 
 
     Definie a defense and national security policy, 
establish a legal format and engage all sectors in a national 
defense community. 
     Improve coordination with foreign policy, coordinating 
with international organizations 
     Prepare the military for this new environment, improve 
training, establish education and training oriented to 
support of democracy; improve mobility and efficiency 
     Realize substantial savings in the defense budget, 
adjusting expenditures to instititutional needs ) with 
active coordination between the military and the Congress 
through existing channels 
     Improving living conditions, interest personnel in good 
moral and social conduct including with a Code of Military 
Ethics 
 
Strategies: 
 
     Define a defense policy, draft and submit a Law on 
Security and Defense, study the threats to the nation and the 
Caribbean 
     Strengthen participation in regional defense and 
security mechanisms to increase mutual understanding and 
transparency 
     Create a National Security Council 
     Revise the Basic Law of the Armed Forces along with 
internal regulations for the branches 
     Draft a Code of Ethics and Morals for the military; 
strengthen this with education 
     Establish a classification of military positions and 
their functions and procedures 
     Redistribute and relocate units according to current 
threats 
     Establish a smaller hierarchy with greater operational 
effectivenessx 
     Inventory and review property and real estate belonging 
to the military 
     Establish a program for personal loans, define social 
security policies and health programs 
     Implement disciplinary regulations for corruption and 
means to separate those bringing discredit to the institution 
     Establish a budget more closely aligned to reality 
 
(END PRECIS) 
 
3.  (U) Drafted by Santo Domingo EcoPol officers. 
 
 
 
 
HERTELL 
"
"15967","4/14/2004 10:53","04SANTODOMINGO2297","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO1606","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 002297 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT PASS DOE FOR SECRETARY OF ENERGY SPENCER ABRAHAM FROM 
AMBASSADOR HANS HERTELL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, ENRG, OVIP 
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR SECRETARY OF ENERGY SPENCER 
ABRAHAM\'S UPCOMING VISIT TO THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC, APRIL 
15 - 16 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 01606 
 
1.  (SBU) The Country Team and I look forward to your April 
15 visit.  The last twelve months has in many aspects been 
the most difficult time for the country in at least twenty 
years.  Dominicans are distrustful of their politicians and 
their institutions, are suffering from the prolonged effects 
of a severe financial adjustment, and are deeply concerned 
about problems in the electricity sector. 
 
2.  (SBU) Dominicans understand that the USG is keenly 
interested in their plight.  On November 21-22 Treasury Under 
Secretary John Taylor visited for discussions with many 
 
SIPDIS 
sectors; in December Assistant Secretary of State for the 
Western Hemisphere Roger Noriega addressed both houses of the 
Dominican Congress and undertook similarly wide 
consultations, discussing the same themes and stressing the 
need for clean elections, strengthened institutions and 
judicial prosecution of banking fraud.  USTR Amb. Zoellick 
opened this dialogue further on January 14, stressing the 
positive perspectives of bilateral and multilateral free 
trade. 
 
3.   (SBU) Your visit will further USG priorities in the 
sector by sending a message that focuses on key elements: 
 
- - the importance of developing a national plan for a 
sustainable system; 
 
- - the need to create strong, independent, and capable 
institutions; 
 
- - respecting the law; 
 
- - the need for impartial treatment and respect for 
contracts; and, fundamental to all of these, 
 
- - transparency in government. 
 
Political outlook 
 
4.   (U) President Hipolito Mejia is strongly 
pro-United-States.  He supported the United States initiative 
in Iraq, and the Dominican Republic is providing a 300-troop 
battalion for Iraq reconstruction from August 2003 to August 
2004.  His government has strongly supported U.S. positions 
in the UN and other international organizations. 
 
5.   (SBU) Mejia is running for re-election in May, 2004. His 
style is that of a populist gentleman farmer.  His campaign 
started at a great disadvantage at around 20 percent, largely 
due to inflation and economic discontent, and he has made a 
slow climb back up through the polls. 
 
5.  (U)  Remaining well ahead of Mejia is former president 
(1996-2000) Leonel Fernandez of the Dominican Liberation 
Party (PLD), on the center left. Fernandez presided during 
the boom of the 1990,s stimulated by tourism and free zone 
exports. 
 
6.   (U) The USG has donated $325,000 to fund a team of 
international observers from the Organization of American 
States for the elections. 
 
Economy 
 
7.   (SBU) The attacks of September 11 and the U.S. economic 
slow-down directly affected Dominican exports and tourism 
receipts.  Massive bank frauds revealed in early 2003 left 
the banking system with a gap equivalent to about 15 percent 
of GDP.  The government decided to guarantee all deposits and 
had to obtain an IMF standby.  The standby quickly fell apart 
when Mejia decided without consultation to incur new debt to 
buy out Spanish interests in the electricity sector.  The 
standby was not renewed until February 2004. 
 
8.   (U) The peso has fallen in value over the last year from 
18 to the dollar to about 45.  Inflation in 2003 reached 
about 40 percent, following years of single digits.  The 
Dominican public has proven relatively reserved and resilient 
in these difficult circumstances. 
 
Electricity Sector 
 
9.   (U) The electricity sector of the Dominican Republic is 
in crisis.  The sector has accumulated US $400 million in 
arrears.  The government\'s portion of the debt stems from 
subsidy arrears, stranded costs on renegotiated contracts, 
and cost associated with the purchase of two distributors. 
Recent rate adjustments have brought collections and 
expenditure roughly in line but have not reduced outstanding 
debt. 
 
10.  (U) The sector has a theoretical generation capacity of 
almost 3000 MW to meet an average daily peak demand of 1600 - 
1800 MW. Peak production is running now at around 1000 - 1200 
MW. 
 
11.  (U) \"Keeping the lights on\" is vital for the economy and 
is crucial for President Mejia\'s re-election prospects. 
 
12.  (SBU) Persistent arrears in servicing debt to generator 
COGENTRIX (owned by Goldman Sachs) almost resulted in a call 
on sovereign guarantees of $400 million that would have 
collapsed the IMF standby and blocked other lending, but the 
govermment has managed with great effort to get current on 
that account. 
 
13. (SBU) U.S.-owned AES is the single largest U.S. investor 
in the Dominican Republic.  It owns a principal generator and 
is seeking to divest itself of its 50% share in a regional 
distribution company.  Dominican officials have failed to 
make payments to AES, in contravention to a February 
sector-wide agreement between the government and operators. 
 
14. (SBU)  The World Bank is providing significant interim 
financing for the electricity sector; the second $25 million 
tranche is contingent on the government delivering a chart 
demonstrating that the first $30 million was spent 
exclusively on fuel and paid to the most efficient 
generators.  The government failed to provide this 
information in the required format, and time-consuming World 
Bank analysis of its voluminous submission is blocking 
release of funds. 
 
HERTELL 
"
"16002","4/14/2004 21:31","04SANTODOMINGO2318","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 002318 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR IO/UNP, WHA, WHA/CAR, DRL; GENEVA FOR AMB, PSA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/14/2008 
TAGS: AORC, PHUM, CU, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN PRESIDENT INSTRUCTS FONMIN TO VOTE FOR 
UNHCR CUBAN RESOLUTION 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Hans Hertell.  Reason: 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (SBU) Dominican President Hipolito Mejia instructed ForMin 
Frank Guerrero Prats at 16:00 today, Wednesday, to tell the 
Dominican delegation to the UN Human Rights Commission to 
vote in favor of the Honduras-sponsored resolution on human 
rights in Cuba. 
 
2.  (C)  The Ambassador had asked for this latest meeting. 
The Presidency had convened the Foreign Minister, and 
Dominican Ambassador to the U.S. Guiliani Curry without 
advising him. Sitting formally at his desk, Mejia was 
emphatic that \"serious considerations\" had made his decision 
a very difficult one: 
 
- - Cuba\'s \"historical\" relationship with the Dominican 
Republic 
- - the fact that some sectors would use the vote for the 
resolution against him in the presidential campaign, now only 
one month from the vote, and 
- - approximately 1500 poor Dominican students are now 
studying in Cuba on scholarships and Mejia expects that many 
or all of them will be sent back home 
 
3.  (C)  Mejia noted that he had discussed the matter 
repeatedly with the Ambassador and had received telephone 
calls from NSC Amb. Otto Reich and Dept Assistant Secretary 
Amb. Roger Noriega.  Foreign Minister Guerrero Pratts and his 
ministry had argued in favor of a Dominican abstention. 
Grimly, Mejia said he expects that opposition figures will 
portray him as \"a puppet of the United States.\"  The 
Ambassador told the President that he had done the right 
thing -- not for the United States but for the hemisphere and 
for the people of the Cuba.  He thanked Mejia for his 
leadership. 
 
4. (C)  Mejia again went over the considerations behind his 
decision, jabbing at a notepad.  \"This is hard,\" he said 
several times.  The Cubans have been calling him and he has 
not yet returned their call.  Mejia mentioned with little 
animation the speech he had made in the morning before a 
civic NGO analyzing corruption (septel) and grimly spoke of 
\"demagogy\" against him in the political campaign.  \"There 
will be serious conflicts.\"  As they left, Guerrero Pratts 
showed the Ambassador a notepad with two Geneva telephone 
numbers and assured him that he would instruct the delegation. 
 
5. (C) Comment.  The Ambassador has telephoned and met Mejia 
repeatedly over the past month specifically to argue for this 
decision.  On Thursday of Holy Week, for example, when the 
Ambassador called on the President at a government-owned 
beach house, at Mejia\'s insistence, the meeting turned into 
an extended private luncheon with the Mejia family. Making 
his decision in this formal manner was a signal to the 
Ambassador of the high cost that the President expected to 
pay for doing the right thing. 
HERTELL 
"
"16102","4/19/2004 11:27","04SANTODOMINGO2366","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04SANTODOMINGO2294","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 002366 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/PPC, AND DRL 
STATE PASS AID/LAC 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/18/2009 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, ASEC, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION #37: SECURITY AN ISSUE, OAS ON 
SITE, LEONEL LEADS 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 2294 
 
Classified By: Classified by Acting ECOPOL Counselor Thomas Pierce.  Re 
ason: 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) This is no. 37 in our series on the Dominican 
presidential election: 
 
(U) Election Security at Stake, OAS Observers Active, Leonel 
Still Leads 
 
(SBU) At 30 days before the election, the violent deaths of 
two persons in the campaign prompted the big three 
presidential candidates to sign an agreement, endorsed by 
civil society, to curb the use of guns and rum at party 
rallies and to respect democratic rules. The OAS observer 
mission, on its second official visit this week, has -- with 
the Ambassador\'s support -- persuaded the Central Election 
Board (JCE) to test the JCE computer network\'s immunity 
against hackers.  The latest polls continue to place 
ex-president Leonel Fernandez far ahead of his rivals. 
 
(SBU) Reacting to a shootout in a low-income Santo Domingo 
neighborhood during campaign activities April 11, which 
killed two persons and wounded at least five others, the 
three candidates -- encouraged by national mediator Mons. 
Agripino Nunez of the civil society \"Monitoring Committee\" -- 
signed April 16 a \"Commitment for a civilized election 
campaign and the strengthening of democracy\" at a ceremony 
with heavy press coverage.  This pact commits the signers to: 
-- Not interfere in each other\'s party activities with 
violence or intimidation; 
-- Respect institutions, cooperating with the JCE, keeping 
the military out of politics, and playing by the rules; 
-- Instruct campaign managers to have as many meetings as 
necessary to ensure their subordinates carry out this 
agreement; and 
-- Accept as witnesses the Monitoring Committee, business and 
labor groups, churches, and the (U.S.-funded) NGOs \"Citizens\' 
Participation\" and \"Foundation for Institutionality and 
Justice.\" 
 
(SBU) The campaign until now has been less violent than in 
previous years, particularly 1994 when the toll was reported 
to have reached 40 dead and over 100 injured.  The April 16 
accord, if implemented, could help maintain the downward 
trend.  That said, the press reported that on April 17 two 
exchanges of small arms fire in connection with campaign 
activities left six persons injured, one seriously. 
 
(C) OAS observer mission chief Santiago Murray and four 
experts, met with GODR authorities, political parties, and 
civil society organizations this week and briefed donor 
embassies (the European Union, Canada, and the United States) 
at the Ambassador\'s residence April 14. According to Murray, 
the JCE had been performing satisfactorily \"so far\" in 
organizing the elections and responding to problems and 
criticisms.  Murray had pressed the JCE to conduct  an 
advance test of the computer system for reporting election 
returns and its security against hackers and others who might 
try to tamper with the results.  The Ambassador supported 
this proposal with JCE President Luis Arias, and the JCE 
subsequently announced that the test would take place April 
24. 
 
(C) At an outbrief with us April 18, Murray expressed his 
concern about use of government resources to support 
President Mejia\'s re-election bid.  After receiving a 
document from Leonel Fernandez\'s PLD with detailed 
allegations, Murray spoke with President Mejia and warned him 
against blatant abuses, such as an announced distribution of 
new motorcycles to \"motoconcho\" taxi drivers slated to begin 
April 29 with Mejia present.  Murray told the President that, 
if he appeared at this event, the OAS mission would criticize 
him publicly.  Mejia protested, but finally agreed not to 
attend. 
 
(SBU) Recent polls continue to show Leonel Fernandez (PLD) 
with a commanding lead over 
President Mejia (PRD) and Eduardo Estrella (PRSC) and a 
possibility of winning in the 
first round.  A poll by the Spanish firm Noxa Consulting 
March 22-26 gave Fernandez 
59 percent of voter intentions, Mejia 22, and Estrella 18; if 
a second round were needed, 
Fernandez would win 66-23 over Mejia and 57-35 over Estrella. 
 A Costa Rican CID poll, with 
data from March 23-31, gave Leonel 55 percent, Mejia 26, and 
Estrella 19.  Whether Leonel 
will sustain this momentum to clear the high bar (50 percent 
plus one vote) required for a 
first-round victory remains to be seen; a new poll is 
expected to be published soon. 
 
(SBU) Speeches by President Mejia on fighting corruption and 
by PRSC candidate Estrella on 
his economic proposals (septel), both on April 14, injected a 
bit more substance into the 
campaign -- but neither party has yet published a campaign 
platform.  Leonel Fernandez\'s 
PLD published its platform recently (reftel). 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Leticia Cantu and Bainbridge Cowell. 
 
3. (U) This report and others in this series can be read on 
the SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ index.cfm along 
with extensive other current material. 
HERTELL 
"
"16125","4/19/2004 19:03","04SANTODOMINGO2381","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SECSTATE71000","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

191903Z Apr 04

 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 002381 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AINF, DR, TBIO 
SUBJECT: FREEDOM OF INFORMATION REQUEST NO.200400520 
 
REF: SECSTATE 71000 
 
(SBU) EMBASSY\'S ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL SECTION AND THE 
FOREIGN COMMERCIAL SERVICE HAVE SEARCHED 2003 AND 2004 FILES 
(CLASSIFIED/UNCLASSIFIED AND PAPER/ELECTRONIC) AND FOUND NO 
REFERENCE TO COMPULSORY LICENSING OR PRICING OF THE 
MEDICATION PLAVIX IN THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC. 2002 FILES HAVE 
BEEN RETIRED. 
KUBISKE 
"
"16138","4/20/2004 10:50","04SANTODOMINGO2386","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE85231","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 002386 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) AND IO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/19/2009 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE ON CUBA/GUANTANAMO RESOLUTION DELIVERED 
TO GODR 
 
REF: STATE 85231 
 
Classified By: Charge Lisa B. Kubiske, reasons 1.4 (b) & (d). 
 
1.  (C)  Charge delivered reftel talking points to Deputy 
Foreign Minister Miguel Pichardo on Monday, April 19th. 
Pichardo said that the GODR is waiting for the text of the 
resolution to be finalized before deciding how it will vote. 
Charge stressed that a vote against the resolution was in 
order due to the procedural irregularities in tabling the 
resolution at this juncture.  Charge will follow-up with 
Foreign Minister Guerrero Prats on April 20. 
KUBISKE 
"
"16181","4/21/2004 10:54","04SANTODOMINGO2440","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04SANTODOMINGO2318|04SANTODOMINGO2386|04STATE85231|04STATE87283","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 002440 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR FOR MCISAAC AND IO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/20/2009 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL 
SUBJECT: GODR WILL VOTE WITH USG ON CUBA/GUANTANAMO BAY 
RESOLUTION IN UNCHR 
 
REF: A. STATE 87283 
     B. STATE 85231 
     C. SANTO DOMINGO 02386 
     D. SANTO DOMINGO 02318 
 
Classified By: Charge Lisa B. Kubiske, reason 1.4(d). 
 
1.  SUMMARY.  (C)  President Mejia told the Ambassador on 
April 20, that the GODR would vote with the USG against the 
UNCHR Cuban sponsored resolution condemning U.S. detainee 
policy at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba.  If the German sponsored 
procedural motion to adjourn the Cuba/Guantanamo Bay 
resolution is made, the GODR will vote for the procedural 
motion to adjourn.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (C)  Charge delivered reftel A and B talking points to 
GODR Foreign Minister Francisco Guerrero Prats on April 20th. 
 Charge thanked Foreign Minister Guerrero Prats for the GODR 
vote on April 15, condemning human rights abuses in Cuba and 
asked for the GODR \"no\" vote on the resolution Cuba has 
tabled condemning the U.S. detainee policy for Guantanamo 
Bay.  Foreign Minster Prats said he would confer with the 
GODR delegation in Geneva, study the resolution and take the 
issue to President Mejia for a final decision. 
 
3.  (C)  In anticipation of Foreign Minister Prats\' call on 
President Mejia, the Ambassador called the President on April 
20 (from Washington, where the Ambassador is attending 
consultations).  President Mejia told the Ambassador that the 
GODR would vote with the USG against the Cuba/Guantanamo Bay 
resolution or for the German procedural motion to adjourn the 
Cuba/Guantanamo Bay resolution. 
 
4.  (C)  During Charge\'s conversation with Foreign Minister 
Prats, he told her that the passage of last week\'s resolution 
condemning human rights abuses in Cuba did not deprive Cuba 
of its sovereignty and that the Cubans, \"always overreact.\" 
Foreign Minister Prats told the Charge that he would speak 
with the GODR delegation in Geneva about the Cuba/Guantanamo 
Bay resolution and then take the matter to President Mejia. 
 
5.  (C)  COMMENT.  The decision of President Mejia to 
instruct the GODR to vote with the U.S. on this important 
issue is another example of the very close collaboration 
between our two governments.  To date there has been no 
public backlash based on the GODR\'s vote for the April 15th 
resolution condemning Cuba for human rights abuses, 
nevertheless, President Mejia believes the decision to stick 
with the USG on this issue will cost him politically (reftel 
D).  If so, the backlash would come after the Cuba/Guantanamo 
Bay vote on April 21.  END COMMENT. 
KUBISKE 
"
"16221","4/21/2004 23:38","04SANTODOMINGO2459","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE87268","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 002459 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) AND IO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/21/2009 
TAGS: KNNP, PREL, DR 
SUBJECT: GODR NO COMMENT ON UNSC DRAFT RESOLUTION ON NON- 
PROLIFERATION 
 
REF: SECSTATE 87268 
 
Classified By: Acting Economic and Political Counselor Tom Pierce, reas 
ons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1.  (C)  Poloff delivered reftel talking points and non-paper 
to GODR Ambassador Jesus Maria Hernandez, the Foreign 
Ministry\'s Director of International Organizations, on April 
21.  No immediate response was forthcoming.  If a substantive 
response is delivered, Embassy will report septel. 
KUBISKE 
"
"16303","4/23/2004 15:53","04SANTODOMINGO2489","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE89135","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 002489 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, KSCA, TBIO, OSCI 
SUBJECT: REQUEST FOR ASSESSMENT OF FOREIGN POLICY 
IMPLICATIONS OF A PROPOSED RESEARCH PROJECT NO. 5 R01 
NS040807-02 INVOLVING A FOREIGN INSTITUTION. 
 
REF: SECSTATE 89135 
 
 1.  No objection to proposed study. 
HERTELL 
"
"16315","4/23/2004 19:36","04SANTODOMINGO2504","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SECSTATE84543","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 002504 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
S/ES-O, WHA ONLY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, DR 
SUBJECT: REQUEST FOR NAMES, TITLES, AND CONTACT NUMBERS FOR 
LEADING GOVERNMENT AND POLITICAL FIGURES 
 
REF: SECSTATE 84543 
 
EMBASSY PROVIDES CONTACT INFORMATION AS REQUESTED REFTEL 
84543: 
 
SANTO DOMINGO 
04/22/04 
 
HIPOLITO MEJIA 
PRESIDENT 
OFFICE:           1(809)695-8176 
FAX:              1(809)682-0827/689-6689 
DIRECT:           1(809)695-8176 
RESIDENCE:        1(809)533-0982 
CELL:             1(809)258-0336 
                  1(809)301-6288 
MILITARY OFFICE:  1(809)695-8176 
COMMENTS: SPANISH IS THE PRIMARY LANGUAGE USED IN 
COMMUNICATIONS WITH GODR. OFFICE PHONE WILL BE  ANSWERED BY 
SECRETARY, ANA GILMA MADERA. THE PRESIDENT DOES NOT HAVE A 
 
SIPDIS 
CELL PHONE. HE CAN BE REACHED THROUGH CELL NUMBER 301-6288 
ANSWERED BY SECRETARY, 258-0336 ANSWERED BY GENERAL DIAZ 
MORFA THE PRESIDENT\'S MILITARY ASSISTANT, OR PHONE NUMBER 
695-8176 ANSWERED BY THE MILITARY OFFICE. 
 
FRANK GUERRERO PRATS 
SECRETARY OF STATE FOR FOREIGN RELATIONS 
 
SIPDIS 
OFFICE:           1(809)535-6280 EXT 2202 
FAX:              1(809)532-0600 
DIRECT:           1(809)532-6751 
RESIDENCE:        1(809)567-1751 
CELL:             1(809)330-2570 
COMMENTS: SPANISH IS THE PRIMARY LANGUAGE USED IN 
COMMUNICATIONS WITH GODR.  OFFICE PHONE WILL BE ANSWERED BY 
SECRETARY, JOAN CEDANO. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
HUGO GUILIANI CURY 
AMBASSADOR TO THE U.S. 
OFFICE:           (202)332-6280 
FAX:              (202)265-8057 
DIRECT:           (202)332-6280 EXT 217 
RESIDENCE:        (202)667-5700 
CELL:             (202)258-8335 
COMMENTS:  OFFICIAL IS FLUENT IN ENGLISH AND SPANISH. DIRECT 
LINE WILL BE ANSWERED BY SECRETARY VIRGINIA ESPOSITO. 
 
HERTELL 
"
"16318","4/23/2004 20:17","04SANTODOMINGO2513","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SANTODOMINGO1606|04SECSTATE83947","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 002513 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS DOE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, ENRG, OVIP, PREL 
SUBJECT: SECRETARY OF ENERGY ABRAHAM PROPOSES TO \"SHED MORE 
LIGHT\" ON DOMINICAN ENERGY SECTOR 
 
REF: A. SANTO DOMINGO 01606 
     B. SECSTATE 83947 
 
1.  Summary.  United States Secretary of Energy Spencer 
Abraham visited the Dominican Republic April 15 on his way to 
the Sixth Western Hemisphere Energy Minister\'s Meeting in 
Trinidad & Tobago, April 19 - 21.  The Secretary met with 
Embassy personnel, private sector representatives, and 
President Mejia and his energy team.  Secretary Abraham 
delivered the message of the need for more transparency, 
respect for rule of law and regulatory institutions, and 
certainty of contract.  He also offered the Dominican 
Republic more technical assistance in three areas of energy 
production and consumption.  End Summary. 
 
2.  U.S. Secretary of Energy Spencer Abraham visited the 
Dominican Republic April 15 on his way to the Sixth Western 
Hemisphere Energy Minister\'s Meeting in Trinidad & Tobago, 
April 19 - 21.  The first stop on the Secretary\'s visit was a 
short Embassy briefing session at the Ambassador\'s Residence. 
 The Embassy session allowed the Ambassador and emboffs to 
brief the Secretary and his staff on the energy, economic, 
political, and commercial issues currently affecting the 
Dominican Republic, including the upcoming presidential 
elections and International Monetary Fund (IMF) Standby 
Agreement. 
 
3.  The Secretary next met with private sector generators to 
hear their views and concerns as well as their suggestions 
for possible solutions to the problems in the sector. 
Representatives of most of the major U.S. companies in the 
sector were present, including AES, Haina, Itabo, Cogentrix, 
and Monte Rio (Caterpillar).  Speaking for the group were AES 
Dominicana President Julian Nebreda and Monte Rio President 
Elena Viyella.  Together they presented the Secretary with a 
short history of the electrical sector, highlighting how the 
sector entered into its current situation and a list of 
short-term and long-term solutions.  The mix of Mr. Nebreda 
and Mrs. Viyella was incredibly effective since each 
represented a different position on the recently signed 
February 11 agreement between the GODR and a number of 
generators (REFTEL).  Secretary Abraham expressed his concern 
over the situation, noting the impression he had gathered was 
that all those present seemed willing to continue operating 
in the Dominican Republic and that the proper reforms and 
more confidence could turn the sector into a viable industry 
and attract more investment.  He also informed them that he 
intended to deliver his message of the need for more 
transparency, respect for rule of law, strenghtening of 
regulatory institutions, and certainty of contract to 
President Mejia.  He concluded by opening the possibility of 
sending personnel down to the Dominican Republic (through 
USAID) for consultations and assistance. 
 
4.  Following the private sector roundtable the Ambassador, 
Secretary, emboffs and energy staffers met with President 
 
SIPDIS 
Mejia and the GODR energy team in the President\'s office. 
The meeting included Rafael Calderon, Minister of Finance, 
George Reinoso, Superintendent of Electricity, Antonio 
Almonte, Director of the National Energy Commission, and 
others.  The Secretary thanked President Mejia for receiving 
him and quickly proposed the offer of possible technical 
assistance (through USAID) in three areas: 1) more energy 
efficiency in government buildings, 2) new technology for 
energy generation and 3) fuel cell technology for remote, 
rural areas.  After the meeting, the Secretary spoke to the 
press outside the President\'s office and emphasized USG and 
GODR long standing close collaboration in numerous areas.  He 
stated his intention of closer coordination between the US 
DOE (through USAID) and the GODR.  The Ambassador also spoke 
to the press explaining how the Secreatry\'s visit was yet 
another example of the close bilateral relations between the 
USG and GODR. 
 
5.  The meeting with President Mejia also allowed the 
Ambassador to deliver President Bush\'s letter on Iraq to 
President Mejia (REFTEL).  President Mejia did not read the 
letter during the meeting.  Embassy will report any response 
by President Mejia or the GODR. 
 
6.  Department of Energy did not have an opportunity to clear 
this cable. 
HERTELL 
"
"16347","4/26/2004 12:19","04SANTODOMINGO2524","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 002524 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, INR; NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD;TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, EFIN, ENRG, KCOR, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION #39: CANDIDATES SKETCH PLATFORMS 
 
 
 1. (SBU) This is no. 39 in our series on the Dominican 
presidential election: 
 
Candidates Sketch Platforms 
 
So far only Leonel Fernandez\'s PLD has published a platform 
for the May 16 presidential elections.  Newspapers of April 
26 indicate that Mejia\'s PRD will release a document in the 
next few days; Mejia promises that it will be readable, \"not 
some 1500 page document\" (the PLD platform consists, in fact, 
of 150 pages). The closest thing to a general declaration 
made by the PRSC\'s Eduardo Estrella is the speech he 
delivered on April 14 to the American Chamber of Commerce in 
Santo Domingo. 
 
That day presidential candidates Mejia and Estrella both 
addressed anti-corruption themes. 
 
Mejia at FINJUS 
 
At the last of 3 events sponsored by U.S.-supported NGO 
Foundation for Institution-Building and Justice (FINJUS) 
USAID director Elena Brinema introduced Mejia and 
acknowledged government advances over the past two years in 
implementing a transparent, results-oriented budget with an 
integrated administrative and financial system and reducing 
presidential discretion in spending. 
 
Mejia acknowledged the difficulty of combating \"traditional\" 
corruption in the Dominican Republic, owing to ineffective 
laws and judicial laxness. He used the occasion to slam rival 
Fernandez as \"tax evader\" unable to explain the origins of 
his own fortune.  Unlike the Fernandez government, Mejia 
said, his administration confronted these problems head on, 
by passing various laws and establishing decrees and 
administrative standards to battle the problem. He had 
created an advisory commission to fight corruption and an 
ethics code for public service.  Mejia reaffirmed his respect 
for the separation of powers and the requirement not to 
influence or criticize judicial decisions.  He declared 
himself scandalized at Fernandez\'s \"nerve\" in coming to 
address FINJUS on the topic of corruption  and asserted that 
Fernandez had repeatedly fired officials who wanted to attack 
corruption.  Mejia cited Administrative Subsecretary Miguel 
Solano and prosecutor Guillermo Moreno. 
 
Estrella Sketches a Platform at the AmCham 
 
Before an American Chamber of Commerce audience the PRSC,s 
Eduardo Estrella advocated changing economic and other 
policies of the two previous administrations.  \"Dominicans 
should be able to trust their government and aspire to 
success, not languish in desperation.\" 
 
Estrella said that if elected he would deal with corruption 
and bank fraud by reversing what he characterized as a lack 
of transparency and honesty by authorities over the past 
eight years.  He would do so by: 
 
---Not interfering in the prosecution or investigation of any 
allegations of fraud; 
 
---Involving all citizens in the fight against corruption; 
 
---Designing and launching a \"Probity Commission\" of civil 
society and professional groups to monitor the performance of 
government agencies; 
 
---Establishing a \"real\" Comptroller General to audit the 
private assets of government officials and compare these with 
the officials\' required annual declarations of assets; and 
 
---Legislating a presumption of guilt of wrongdoing by 
officials who manage public accounts, who would be obliged to 
prove their innocence. 
On economic problems, Estrella saw a need to deter peso 
devaluation and to place ceilings on internal and external 
debt. He favored speeding up signing and implementation of 
the U.S.-Dominican free trade agreement during the 
post-election transition (before Aug. 16) and urged 
negotiation of a similar trade agreement with the European 
Union. 
 
Among other measures, Estrella advocated: 
 
---Fiscal Reform.  He slammed the current policy of 
increasing taxes. He called for a fiscal responsibility law 
similar to those in Brazil and Peru, reducing executive 
discretion in spending and prescribing criminal penalties for 
violators. 
 
---Austerity.  Estrella promised to reduce waste by 
restricting official travel abroad, use of cellular phones, 
purchase of SUVs and luxury vehicles, and electricity 
consumption. 
 
---Foreign Investment:  He proposed offering tax incentives 
to Dominicans living overseas to return to the country and 
establish businesses. 
 
---Energy.  On the premise that energy sector privatization 
had been poorly executed, Estrella proposed that generation 
companies also take over distribution and billing. 
 
---External Debt: He proposed renegotiating to obtain terms 
similar to those of the early 1990s, which allowed a 
reduction in principal payments and interest with grace 
periods lasting for almost 10 years. 
 
Estrella\'s full presentation is available on the Santo 
Domingo SIPRNET site. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Leticia Cantu. 
 
3. (U) This report and others in this series can be read on 
the SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ index.cfm along 
with extensive current material. 
HERTELL 
"
"16351","4/26/2004 13:02","04SANTODOMINGO2525","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 002525 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL; NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB; USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, EFIN, ENRG, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTIONS #41: FERNANDEZ AND ESTRELLA 
BOTH CALL FOR ECONOMIC AUSTERITY 
 
 
1. (SBU) This is no. 41 in our series on the Dominican 
presidential election: 
 
Fernandez and Estrella Attack Mejia\'s Economics, Preach 
Austerity 
 
Leonel\'s Paradoxical Proposals 
 
PLD presidential candidate Leonel Fernandez, spoke April 21 
before the American Chamber of Commerce (full text available 
on our SIPRNET site).  He proposed creation of an economic 
\"crisis management team\" for the first 100 days of his 
presidency to restore the public\'s confidence in the economy 
and overcome a \"leadership credibility problem.\" The team 
would draw on experts from Harvard University and the Earth 
Institute of Columbia University (economist Jeffrey Sachs) 
and a study by the Economist Intelligence Unit -- entities 
sometimes critical of U.S. economic policies and the IMF. The 
proposed make-up of the crisis team fits awkwardly with his 
track record of energy sector privatization in the late 1990s 
and his promises to respect the nation\'s IMF accord. 
Nonetheless, most of his policy prescriptions emphasized 
austerity, fiscal responsibility and attracting private 
investment, and he would involve business and civil society 
groups in discussions with the team. 
 
If elected, Fernandez said, he would separate handling of 
short-term debt created by the Central Bank\'s massive bailout 
of depositors in three failed commercial banks last year from 
the Central Bank,s monetary policy. He blamed domestic 
mismanagement, not external shocks, for the country\'s 
\"enormous crisis.\" This mismanagement included: 
 
---Mejia,s campaign rhetoric in the 2000 presidential 
election debunking the prosperity and achievements of the 
previous administration and sowing public distrust; 
 
---Deficit spending and tax increases, due to expansion of 
the public payroll (Fernandez noted that President Bush had 
cut taxes at the start of this term; Mejia had raised them); 
 
---Government\'s inability to regulate the banking and private 
sectors; 
 
---Soaring public debt and government competition with 
private firms for credit; and 
 
---Lack of coordination among fiscal, monetary and exchange 
rate policy. 
 
Fernandez promised a quick start for the country\'s economic 
recovery.  He would stabilize the exchange rate, lower 
interest rates, and stimulate job creation. He acknowledged 
he would face many obstacles: 
 
---Excessive savings certificates at the Central Bank 
(quasi-fiscal deficit); 
 
---Financial sustainability problems of the energy sector; 
 
---The recent doubling of the country\'s foreign debt and 
quadrupling of domestic debt; and 
 
---A need for fiscal reform, in accordance with the IMF 
agreement, to balance public finances and modernize the tax 
structure. 
 
Resolving the Energy Crisis 
 
Fernandez blamed the nation\'s frequent electrical blackouts 
on two Mejia decisions: the Madrid Agreement and the buyback 
of electricity distribution companies (EDE-Norte and EDE-Sur) 
from private Spanish firm Union Fenosa. The Madrid Agreement 
to lower contracted electricity generation tariffs in 
exchange for substantial one-time payments violated Dominican 
law according to Fernandez, and the purchase of the EDEs led 
to suspension of the IMF standby agreement for four months, 
until it was revised and renewed in February. Fernandez 
proposed setting up a compensation fund to sustain the energy 
sector and make it financially viable, using state shares in 
the EDEs as collateral.  Financing would come from the 
utility companies, consumers and international financial 
institutions . 
 
The candidate called for the government to redefine its role 
with regard to energy.  Authorities should adopt a spirit of 
reform, regulate the sector\'s activities in accordance with 
the law and modernize regulations.  These steps in turn would 
attract more private investment and reduce state involvement 
as an owner and operator. 
 
Stabilization and Tax Reform 
 
A PLD government, Leonel said, would prefer to borrow from 
multilateral organizations on soft terms rather than from 
private international banks. He would eventually renegotiate 
the debt and extend the terms, but would never default on the 
payments. He would proceed with tax reform according to the 
IMF guidelines, suspending the \"distorted taxes\" of the Mejia 
administration and compensating for a loss of tariff revenues 
expected upon implementation of the U.S.-Dominican free trade 
agreement. With this and the other measures, Fernandez 
promises to put the country back on the path of progress and 
modernization by 2005. 
 
Estrella Sings Similar Tune 
 
The same day, PRSC presidential candidate Eduardo Estrella 
spoke to the prominent National Council of Private Enterprise 
(CONEP), promising to reduce public expenditures, promote 
investments, and provide assistance to small businesses, and 
adopt development plans looking out 20 years instead of only 
four. Estrella expressed determination to pursue his election 
campaign, regardless of disappointing poll numbers and the 
recent defection to Fernandez of PRSC leader former vice 
president Jacinto Peynado and various of the PRSC \"old guard.\" 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Leticia Cantu. 
 
3. (U) This report and others in this series can be read on 
the SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ index.cfm along 
with extensive current material. 
HERTELL 
"
"16354","4/26/2004 13:10","04SANTODOMINGO2526","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 002526 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, PGOV 
SUBJECT:  DOMINICAN ELECTION # 40: FERNANDEZ CONFIDENT BUT 
CONCERNED ABOUT FRAUD 
 
 
1. (SBU) This is no. 40 in our series on the Dominican 
presidential election: 
 
FERNANDEZ CONCERNED ABOUT FRAUD BUT CONFIDENT IN ABILITY TO 
RESTORE PROGRESS 
 
On April 13 at luncheon with the Ambassador PLD presidential 
candidate Leonel Fernandez spent the first third of the 
encounter focusing on concerns over possible electoral fraud. 
Fernandez then contrasted his previous administration and the 
current PLD platform with the \"flawed\" Mejia administration. 
Fernandez confirmed that if elected, he would maintain strong 
relations with the United States. 
 
With polls now showing the PLD margin lower than before, 
Fernandez, VP candidate Rafael Albuquerque, advisor and 2000 
presidential candidate Danilo Medina, and \"ideologue\" 
Temistocleses Montas identified various relatively minor 
technical problems with the electoral process, they avowed 
themselves more concerned with President Mejia\'s 
authoritarian tendencies.  Fernandez went so far as to say 
Mejia resembled dictator Trujillo in some ways and noted that 
Mejia\'s father was named in honor of the dictator.  Fernandez 
warned that Mejia was using extensive public resources and 
might employ intimidation tactics to ensure his reelection 
bid. 
 
The Ambassador outlined U.S measures to reinforce the 
election process and shifted the conversation towards 
perspectives of a PLD government toward the United States. 
The PLD is the only major Dominican party to have published a 
detailed platform, but its platform is noticeably vague with 
respect to bilateral relations with the United States. 
Fernandez emphasized that the Dominican Republic will be an 
unconditional U.S. ally in the fight against terrorism.  He 
will support existing cooperative efforts with the U.S. 
government in areas such as extradition, counter-narcotics, 
free trade, and trafficking in persons. 
 
The tone of the PLD luncheon was positive and the content 
generally substantive.  Fernandez, a lawyer educated in the 
United States, uses an intellectual social science 
perspective to analyze Dominican politics.  His positive 
electoral prospects are due in large part to the positive 
performance of the Dominican economy throughout his previous 
administration -- results not entirely of his own making. The 
PLD platform promises to promote economic growth while 
enacting further modernization and privatization reforms. 
Though concerned about the prospect of his main opponent 
resorting dirty fighting in the final weeks, Fernandez 
appears confident in his ability to recapture the presidency 
and eventually to restore economic progress in the Dominican 
Republic. 
 
2.  (U) Drafted by Clare Ribando. 
 
3.  (U) This report and others in this series can be read on 
the SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.gov/p/pwha/santodomingo/inde x.cfm 
along with extensive other current material. 
HERTELL 
"
"16431","4/28/2004 13:28","04SANTODOMINGO2575","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 002575 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR AND PM;NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB; TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, MARR, MOPS, PGOV, DR, IZ 
SUBJECT: DIPNOTE 11048 - PRESIDENT MEJIA NOTIFIES 
WITHDRAWAL OF TROOPS FROM IRAQ 
 
1. On April 27 Embassy received from the Foreign Ministry 
formal notification of withdrawal from Iraq by the Dominican 
Quisqueya Batallion, dated April 26. 
 
Text follows: (Complementary intro...) and refers to the 
situation of the Ad Hoc \"Quisqueya\" Task Force, currently in 
Iraq. 
 
As it is known by that honorable diplomatic mission, the 
government of the Dominican Republic, as proof of its 
unwavering commitment in the fight against terrorism, and in 
connection with the operation led by the United States of 
America to free and create the proper conditions for the 
stability and development of the people of Iraq, joined 
\"Operation Iraqi Freedom,\" sending armed forces consisting of 
302 infantry soldiers, as a significant support from our 
armed forces for the coalition. 
 
On April 19, 2004, the Spanish government, fulfilling the 
commitment made by their current President, announced the 
withdrawal of its troops from \"Operation Iraqi Freedom,\" 
immediately suspending all operations by Spanish personnel, 
leaving the Dominican troops without the necessary support to 
perform their regular operations. This made it impossible for 
our troops to carry out their assigned responsibilities. 
 
For these reasons, his Excellency, the President of the 
Republic, has informed the Secretary of the Armed Forces of 
the decision to remove the Dominican troops from Iraq as soon 
as possible, given that the conditions are not adequate to 
assure that the troops are not exposed to life-threatening 
danger. 
 
The Department of Foreign Relations gives notice to the 
government of the United States of the decision taken, at the 
same time that it reiterates that the Dominican Republic will 
continue supporting and cooperating with the United States of 
America in the fight against terrorism, and in steps taken in 
favor of the reconstruction of Iraq and world peace. 
 
(End text)(Complementary close) 
HERTELL 
"
"16435","4/28/2004 13:38","04SANTODOMINGO2580","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 002580 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL;NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB; USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD;TREASURY FOR 
OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTIONS #42: PLD PROMISES TO THE USG 
 
 
1.  (SBU)  Following is number 42 in our series on the 
Dominican elections. 
 
 PLD Promises to the USG 
 
In mid-March PLD campaign manager Danilo Medina led a 
four-person PLD delegation to Washington, where they met with 
NSC personnel and asked for an appointment at the Department 
of State.  Since Medina had made no approach to the U.S. 
Embassy in Santo Domingo, the PLD members were received by 
the Dominican Republic desk officer in WHA/CAR. 
 
Medina was the PLD nominee for the 2000 presidential 
elections.  He was accompanied by economist Eduardo Tejera, 
economist Julio Ortega, and PLD strategist Juan Temistocles 
Montas.  The delegation pressed for U.S. support for election 
monitoring and left an aide memoire outlining PLD commitments 
to the U.S. government on the policy aims of a PLD government 
if elected.  Particularly notable were an avowal of intent to 
continue law enforcement cooperation, support for Dominican 
participation in Iraq within the Spanish brigade, and a 
commitment to honor the free trade agreement just negotiated 
by the Meja government with the United States. 
 
Embassy officers raised directly with Medina the following 
week the need to coordinate Washington contacts in advance 
with the Embassy in order to assure appropriate attention and 
USG preparation for formal contacts.  Emboffs stressed, once 
again, the impartiality of the Ambassador and Embassy staff 
and the fact that Embassy reporting s widely disseminated in 
the USG foreign affairs community.  Medina acknowledged these 
points. 
 
The Ambassador subsequently invited Tejera and Ortega to 
luncheon along with economists Jaime Aristy Escuder (PRD 
advisor) and Eduardo Garcia (independent).  The conversation 
was a courteous if guarded debate on approaches to the 
overhang of short-term debt, consisting of certificates held 
by the Central Bank, and an exploration of the prospects for 
macroeconomic stability and the exchange rate.  On April 13 
the Ambassador hosted Leonel Fernandez with Medina, Montas, 
and VP candidate Rafael Albuquerque. 
 
Following is the text of the PLD aide memoire: 
 
AIDE MEMOIRE 
Proposals from the Dominican Opposition for Deepening Ties 
with the United States 
 
The Dominican Opposition seeks to initiate and establish a 
permanent and open communication channel with the government 
of the United Status. The specific objectives of said channel 
are as follows: 
 
  To guarantee stability in the Dominican Republic, we seek 
to obtain the support of the US government for a fraud free 
electoral process in the Dominican Republic leading to the 
May 16, 2004 election day. For political stability to prevail 
in the Dominican Republic and the Caribbean more broadly, it 
is crucial to contain the current government\'s intentions to 
manipulate both the process and the outcome of the elections. 
A proactive role on the part of US government officials 
including public warnings could help dissuade these plans. 
 
  To insure the transparency of the elections, the US 
government should support the presence of electoral observers 
from the OAS and highly respected non governmental 
institutions such as the International Republican Institute, 
IFES, NOl, Carter Center and others. Electoral observation 
must be conducted not only on election day but long before to 
insure the transparency of the entire process. 
  In the likely event that Dr. Leonel Fernandez emerges as 
the winner of the electoral contest, the new government will 
not modify any agreement currently in effect with the United 
States. The new government will search for mechanisms to 
consolidate current commitments and will aim to improve the 
quality of relations between the United States and the 
Dominican Republic. 
 
  Specifically, the participation of the Dominican Armed 
Forces in the Plus Ultra Spanish-Latin American brigade in 
Iraq will be honored. Moreover, the new government will seek 
to expand collaboration with the United States and other 
democratic countries in all anti-terrorist activities to 
insure that the Caribbean becomes fully integrated into 
ongoing Third Border security initiatives. 
 
  The new government will also honor the Dominican 
Republic-United States free trade agreement negotiated under 
the terms of CAFT A and pledges to sign and ratify any 
agreement that emerges from such negotiations. 
 
  Along these same lines, the new Dominican government will 
continue to support the completion and ratification of a Free 
Trade Area of the Americas under the terms agreed to by the 
United States and other countries of the Americas during 
recent Trade Ministerial meetings and at the Summit of the 
Americas held in Monterrey, Mexico. 
 
  The key objective of the new government will to be to 
address the economic crisis and to establish the mechanisms 
to provide a stable environment for US and all foreign 
private investment. In this sense, the new government will 
pursue sound economic policies that address the urgent need 
to stabilize the economy. Along these lines, the government 
will honor current agreements with the IMP and will remain 
open to US government input on how best to move forward 
toward a fast paced economic recovery. 
 
  The new government will support and actively collaborate 
with the United States and the international community in the 
ongoing efforts to bring peace and stability to Haiti. The 
objectives of bringing peace, stability, economic growth, and 
disarming the population are as important to the Dominican 
Republic as to any member of the Haiti Friends Group and the 
international forces present in Haiti. Of critical concern to 
the Dominican Republic is the potential of an unrestricted 
flow of immigrants fleeing Haiti as such an occurrence could 
seriously erode social, economic. and political stability in 
the Dominican Republic. 
 
  A new government presided by Dr. Leone! Fernandez wil1 
actively cooperate with US efforts to stem the tide of 
illegal human trafficking of Dominican nationals toward 
Puerto Rico. The new government will seek to renew and deepen 
joint efforts to prevent the trafficking of human beings, 
drugs, and other illicit goods. 
 
  The new government will enforce all existing US-Dominican 
money laundering and counter narcotics agreements. In 
addition, a new government presided by Dr. Fernandez will 
support all international efforts aimed at combating these 
illicit activities. 
 
The Dominican opposition believes that establishing an open 
communications channel with US government officials will help 
deepen and strengthen ties between our two countries and will 
allow for the consolidation of a mature and stable 
relationship over the long term that will promote the best 
interests of our respective nations. 
 
2.  (U) Drafted by Michael Meigs 
 
3.  (U) This report and others in our elections series are 
available on our SIPRNET site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/  
along with extensive other material. 
HERTELL 
"
"16469","4/29/2004 11:00","04SANTODOMINGO2601","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 002601 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR AND PM;NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB; TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, MARR, MOPS, OPDC, PREL 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN SECRETARY FOR ARMED FORCES SENDS EMBASSY 
OFFICIAL NOTIFICATION OF TROOP PULLOUT IN IRAQ 
 
1.  On April 28, Embassy received official correspondence 
from Secretary of Armed Forces, Jose Miguel Soto Jimenez, 
stating the Dominican Republic\'s intention to remove their 
troops from Iraq.  His letter is dated April 20 but was 
almost certainly written on April 26 or April 27. 
 
2. An image of the original is available on our SIPRNET site, 
linked to the article    \"DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: PRES. MEJIA 
EXPLAINS TROOP PULLOUT FROM IRAQ.\" 
 
3.Following is an unofficial translation. 
 
(Begin Translation) 
 
Your Excellency, Mr. Ambassador: 
 
This Ministry warmly salutes your Embassy, and takes 
advantage of this occasion to inform you that the Dominican 
government has made the firm decision to remove, as quickly 
as possible, our soldiers from the state of Iraq.  They have 
been there since August 2003 as part of the coalition for 
Operation Iraqi Freedom, led by your prestigious country, 
with the praiseworthy mission of liberating and creating the 
proper conditions for the advancement of that grand society 
of Iraq.  We have issued directives in keeping with this 
determination. 
 
The Dominican Armed Forces take advantage of the opportunity 
to reiterate its support to the United States government in 
its war against terrorism and in its quest for world peace, 
at the same time reiterating our high sentiments of 
consideration and esteem. 
 
(signed) 
Jose Miguel Soto Jimenez 
 
(End translation) 
HERTELL 
"
"16492","4/29/2004 16:54","04SANTODOMINGO2607","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 002607 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP, SENV, DR, ETRD, EWWT, EIND 
SUBJECT: ROCK ASH SHIPMENTS FROM PUERTO RICO TO DOMINICAN 
REPUBLIC STIR PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTROVERSY FOR U.S. FIRM 
 
 
 1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: A controversy over rock ash shipments 
from a Puerto Rico power plant owned by U.S.-based energy 
company AES has become a topic of local comment.  The 
Dominican Environment Secretariat confirms that the local 
firm that imported the product for construction in the north 
obtained all required permits and the material is an 
environmentally safe, commercial product.  The press has 
featured assertions from the political opposition and others 
that the product is toxic waste -- an erroneous result leaked 
by the technical lab of a local university. End summary. 
 
2.  (U)  A controversy over shipments of rock ash from a 
Puerto Rico power plant has become a topic of local comment. 
Rock ash is a coal combustion product (CCP) or by-product 
from burning coal in coal-fired power plants, such as the AES 
power plant in Puerto Rico.  CCPs are used for making cement, 
building roads, backfilling, and even building and consumer 
products. 
 
3.  (SBU) AES Puerto Rico Plant Manager Al Dyer, his 
associate Neil Watlington, and local AES President Julian 
Nebreda briefed Charge and emboffs April 21 on the rock ash 
shipments.  The company representatives said that AES Puerto 
Rico had contracted Florida-based Silverspot Corporation to 
remove the rock ash.  Silverspot, in turn, established a 
Dominican company to further process the rock ash and 
distribute it to commercial end-users in the Dominican 
Republic or the United States.  The company had distributed 
rock ash to the Port of Manzanillo for parking lot 
construction and to the Port of Samana.  Both are located on 
the north coast of the country.  Silverspot, AES and the 
Secretariat of Environment have confirmed to emboffs that 
 
SIPDIS 
Silverspot obtained the necessary permits. 
 
4.  (SBU) Charge told the AES representatives that the 
embassy stood ready to assist in every way possible, as it 
has with energy payment issues, but advised that the company 
needed to consider carefully the public relations aspect of 
the rock ash shipments and the potential impact of negative 
press on the company\'s Dominican energy interests (AES 
operates the regional power distribution company EDESTE and 
owns a generating plant). 
 
5.  (SBU) After local press began reporting in late March 
that rock ash from the United States was being \"dumped\" in 
the Dominican Republic, a local university tested the product 
and announced that it contained unsafe levels of heavy metals 
and other toxins.  The press and internet sites associated 
the rock ash with birth defects and dead whales on Dominican 
beaches, and alleged that the United States had violated the 
United Nations Environment Programme\'s Basel Convention on 
the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous 
Wastes.Editorials included sensational captions, such as 
\"Garbage Dump of the Caribbean.\"  The Dominican Senate 
considered a resolution calling for the re-export of the 
material to Puerto Rico. 
 
6.  (SBU) On April 15, Secretary of the Environment and 
Natural Resources, Frank Moya Pons, told Embassy officers 
that, while he awaits the results of a full investigation he 
commissioned from the Environmental Prosecutor, an EPA 
finding on the laboratory analysis of rock ash would add 
credibility to his agency\'s efforts to make an impartial, 
science-based decision.  He said he would also welcome 
embassy efforts to publicize EPA\'s findings.  Embassy has 
contacted EPA and will follow up with a formal request for 
assistance with sample analysis. 
 
7.  (SBU) On April 16, Econoff met with Sub Secretary of the 
Environment Rene Ledesma, who had issued the environmental 
permits to import the substance.  Ledesma acknowledged the 
public relations brouhaha but presented a notebook of 
documents defending his decision.  His findings appeared to 
be supported by information from the U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, indicating that the Dominican university 
study had used flawed methodology and that the product was 
environmentally friendly. Ledesma commented that the 
university had suspended the employee who had \"leaked\" the 
flawed study. 
 
8.  (SBU) Ledesma said that a PRD senator from Samana who was 
from a faction of the party opposed to Mejia had pursued the 
issue for political reasons.  Ledesma also speculated that 
local clinker suppliers were objecting to the importation of 
rock ashfor protectionist reasons . 
 
7.  (SBU) Econoff spoke with a leading whale expert and 
environmentalist residing in Samana, raising the issue of a 
dead whale recently washed ashore on the north coast.  She 
said that the studies she had seen on the rock ash showed 
safe levels of metals and other substances and that from her 
observations, there was no adverse environmental impact from 
the shipments.  She said that coastal contamination could not 
have been the cause of the whale\'s death, since it was a 
\"deep-water whale,\" not one of the humpbacks that migrates 
each year to shallow Dominican waters. 
 
8.  (SBU) Silverspot owner Roger Fina told Embassy\'s 
Commercial Counselor April 20 that he was in the Dominican 
Republic in response to a subpoena and that he wanted to 
resolve the misunderstandings over the rock ash shipments. 
He provided much of the same information concerning the 
studies and indicated he would be meeting with GODR 
officials. 
 
9.  (SBU) In response to a question from university students 
on April 20 President Mejia commented that the 
environmentalists complaining about the shipments had 
exaggerated and were \"blatherers who had an opinion on 
everything.\"  However, he added that rock ash was not \"such a 
good thing\" and that his Environmental Secretariat should not 
have permitted it to enter the country.  If it provided 
toxic, it should be immediately sent back to Puerto Rico. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
10. (SBU) This public relations scandal has elements of 
politics, commercial protectionism, and happy scandal 
mongering.  Tere has been so much negative press that AES and 
Silverspot have little chance of fully informing and changing 
public opinion, even with scientific evidence.  The GODR may 
well let matters lie, depending on how this continues to play 
out in the media. The firms involved have stopped shipments 
for now and intend to counter the toxicity issues with 
independent studies followed by a public message.  AES 
previously received negative publicity over rock ash 
shipments, but the similar incident last year faded from the 
press after a couple of days.  The more immediate problems of 
AES  concern payments due from the GODR and other 
participants in the energy sector. 
 
 
 
 
HERTELL 
"
"16496","4/29/2004 22:12","04SANTODOMINGO2619","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO1597","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 002619 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR DRL, IO; GENEVA FOR PSA AND LABOR ATTACHE; DEPT 
LABOR FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC, ELAB, DR, CU 
SUBJECT: ILO: CUBA AND VENEZUELA REPRISALS AGAINST 
DOMINICAN CANDIDATE TO CHAIR ANNUAL MEETINGS IN JUNE 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 1597 
 
 1.  Dominican Minister of Labor Milton Ray Guevara mentioned 
to EcoPol counselor on April 28 at the dedication of a Dept 
of Labor sponsored program that the Venezuelan and Cuban 
missions in Geneva are lobbying against his candidacy to 
chair the ILO annual meetings, specifically because they 
perceived that the Dominican Republic had cast the decisive 
vote on the UNHRC resolution on Cuba. 
 
2.  Ray Guevara said that the Canadian mission is being 
supportive, but he appeared concerned about the prospect that 
the Americas group might not put him forward as its candidate 
if the Venezuelans and Cubans persist.  He said that CARICOM 
states, previously leaning his way, are now hesitating. 
 
3.  Ray Guevara is well and favorably known to the Embassy 
Santo Domingo; we ask that the Department (WHA and IO) and 
Mission Geneva consider measures to counteract the campaign 
against Ray Guevara, which is to some extent a deliberately 
anti-U.S. effort. 
 
HERTELL 
"
"16648","5/5/2004 22:49","04SANTODOMINGO2718","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SECSTATE97157","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 002718 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
H, WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, OPDC, MOPS 
SUBJECT: CONGRESSIONAL INQUIRY: DOMINICAN EXPENDITURES FOR 
COALITION IN IRAQ 
 
REF: SECSTATE 97157 
 
1.  Embassy has extrapolated general costs for Dominican 
Quisqueya battalion August 2003 to May 2004 as follows: 
 
Salaries    $75,000 monthly x 10 months  for $750,000 
Incentive pay, total                          120,000 
Ammunition and training costs                  12,000 
Miscellaneous travel expenses for coalition 
     conferences                               15,000 
                                               - - - - 
                                            $ 897,000 
 
2.  Figures are approximate. 
HERTELL 
"
"16662","5/6/2004 13:33","04SANTODOMINGO2722","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 002722 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR AND WHA EPSC 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
TREASURY FOR OASIA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, ECON, PGOV 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION SERIES #43: PLD CANDIDATE 
FERNANDEZ LOOKS TO ECONOMIST INTELLIGENCE UNIT FOR POLICY 
PRESCRIPTIONS 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO XX AND PREVIOUS 
 
1. (SBU) This is cable # 43 in our series on the Dominican 
elections. 
 
PLD CANDIDATE FERNANDEZ LOOKS TO EIU FOR POLICY PRESCRIPTIONS 
 
Judging from the consultant company he keeps, PLD candidate 
Leonel Fernandez is anything but a radical in economic 
matters.  Rather than rely exclusively on in-house PLD 
economists -- a small group, some of whom are experienced and 
capable -- he turned at the outset of the campaign to the 
thoroughly orthodox \"Economist Intelligence Unit\" for policy 
prescriptions. 
 
Fernandez recently provided to us a 113-page study entitled 
\"The Dominican Republic: Towards a New Development Model.\" 
The Democracy and Development Global Foundation (FUNDGLODE), 
headed by Fernandez, contracted the Economist Intelligence 
Unit (EIU) to conduct the study, which was completed in 
January.  The document outlines some of the factors that the 
EIU concluded led to the Dominican Republic\'s recent economic 
crisis, suggests possible measures to ameliorate the 
short-term consequences, and looks at longer-term solutions 
to improve prospects for sustainable development.  The policy 
prescriptions are largely based on case studies of countries 
that have faced similar challenges.  The guidance looks 
similar to principles the International Monetary Fund applies 
in its programs and argues for greater economic 
liberalization.  Leonel has turned to the EIU for advice -- 
and that the advice he has received appears consistent with 
the our broad policy objectives. 
 
Fernandez founded FUNGLODE as a think tank and research 
center following his presidency (1996 to 2000).  Though the 
organization asserts political independence and claims to be 
non-partisan, Fernandez presides and it is closely identified 
with the PLD. In an April 21 speech at an American Chamber of 
Commerce Luncheon, Fernandez cited the EIU study and said 
that he had circulated it among business leaders for comment. 
 He said that if he were elected, in the first 100 days he 
would convene a crisis-management team to design a plan to 
restore confidence and that Columbia University\'s Jeffrey 
Sachs and other representatives from Columbia and Harvard 
would be part of the team.  (Sachs spoke at a FUNGLODE 
luncheon last spring that Fernandez hosted.) 
 
Fernandez pointed to South Korea\'s crisis-management plan 
following the 1997-1998 Asian Crisis, which the EIU study 
presented as an example.  Fernandez said he would soon 
publish the study for broader distribution and invite 
business, religious and other community leaders to discuss 
recommendations.  The EIU\'s conclusions may provide insight 
into what economic policy under a new Fernandez 
administration might look like. 
 
The EIU recommendations for the Dominican Republic covered a 
broad array of issues and included examples of countries that 
managed short-term crises and of others that made long-term 
adjustments.  Some of the study\'s short-term conclusions for 
the Dominican Republic can be summarized as follows: 
 
-- Adherence to IMF targets increases access to funds, 
supports investor confidence, provides basis for 
macro-economic stability, decreases vulnerability to shocks, 
and strengthens the domestic banking sector; 
 
-- Re-privatization of national assets provides immediate 
revenue but requires sound regulatory framework. 
 
-- Resolution of economic and social problems must be given 
priority over political motivations. 
 
-- Anti-corruption efforts are crucial. 
 
-- Authorities must educate the public on benefits of cutting 
the public sector and privatizing state assets. 
 
-- A stable and proactive debt-management program should be 
implemented. 
 
-- Energy issues can be tackled through emergency measures, 
increased private sector participation, and establishment of 
strong regulatory framework. 
 
-- The country should strengthen weakened banking systems and 
take advantage of technical assistance to meet international 
standards. 
 
-- A new administration should adopt measures to stimulate 
private sector development to restart the economy. 
 
-- Public relations are important -- a new government must 
establish strong communication channels and a public 
relations strategy for dealing with investors and keeping 
them informed. 
 
The EIU study presents a blueprint for a longer term economic 
model also.  Some of the recommendations include: 
 
-- Encourage competition and phase out subsidies in the 
energy sector; 
 
-- Avoid excessive reliance on free zones and tourism 
enclaves that can distort the economy and concentrate 
benefits that don\'t help with broader development of 
communities or the country. 
 
-- Liberalize trade and competition by reducing import duties; 
 
-- Diversify crops and adopt country/sector branding; 
 
-- Increase competition and regulatory supervision in banking 
and financial sector and establish risk-based early-warning 
system to identify vulnerable institutions;and 
 
-- Support small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). 
 
The report addresses other long-term issues such as 
investment in human capital through improved healthcare and 
social security, poverty reduction, and investment in 
information technologies.  It notes that the Dominican 
Republic has performed poorly in each of those areas. 
 
Compared with the PLD platform -- 
 
The PLD\'s economic platform, introduced last month, largely 
mirrors the EIU study, while explicitly blaming the ruling 
PRD for upsetting the economic stability and sustained growth 
achieved while Fernandez was President.  The PLD asserts that 
under the PRD there has been increased unemployment, 
accelerated government spending, an unchecked policy of 
internal and external borrowing, and mismanagement of the 
banking crisis, all of which led to \"negative performance 
during these last years.\"  The Party platform lists ambitious 
objectives in broad terms and delineates strategies -- which 
are stated as 
broad objectives themselves, in most instances lacking 
specifics.  The economic platform 
covers macroeconomic policy, the industrial sector, tourism, 
agriculture, and sugar. 
 
Although the PLD macroeconomic policy calls for fiscal 
austerity, tax reform, sustainable 
debt, strict monetary policy, and a market-based exchange 
rate, it makes only veiled 
reference to the International Monetary Fund standby 
agreement. 
 
On trade, the PLD calls for increased competitiveness and 
continuation of the 
competitiveness program initiated under Mejia.  Similarly, on 
tariffs, the platform sets an objective of establishing a 
tariff regimen \"adjusted to the situation of openness.\" 
 
Of possible concern for the multilateral trade agenda, the 
platform calls for renewing the strategic alliances and 
guarding the interests of small economies in all of the trade 
negotiating forums, and reintegrating the country into 
CARICOM\'s \"regional negotiating machinery.\" 
 
Brain and Heart 
 
Throughout the campaign, Fernandez has sought to convince 
prospective voters through his measured, rational analysis of 
the country\'s problems. He is thoughtful but not necessarily 
a deep thinker - - rather, a man ready to listen to expert 
advice.  Recent radio spots have sought to rouse more 
emotion, featuring particularly a recording of his 
back-and-forth dialogue with a rally blaming Hipolito for the 
rise in prices of meat, electricity, fuel and transport.  His 
slogan promises that \"Progress is returning.\"  In his 
regional journeys Fernandez has met separately with gathering 
from economic sectors, promising improvements but warning 
them that he will need a year or more to put the government\'s 
house in order. 
 
Assuming that Fernandez eventually wins the foreshadowed 
victory, he will need both brain and heart -- that is, 
convincing charisma -- to hold the people\'s faith long enough 
for the orthodox prescriptions to work. 
 
2. (U)  Drafted by Thomas Pierce. 
 
3. (U)  This report and others in our elections series can be 
consulted on our SIPRNET site 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/   along with 
extensive other material. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HERTELL 
"
"16682","5/6/2004 20:53","04SANTODOMINGO2742","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 SANTO DOMINGO 002742 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/PPSC AND DRL; 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB; USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD;TREASURY FOR 
OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTIONS #44:  CANDIDATES ON MACRO AND 
FINANCIAL POLICY 
 
 
1.  (SBU) Following is number 44 in our Dominican elections 
series: 
 
Candidates on Macro and Financial Policy 
 
In April all three of the principal candidates for the 
Dominican presidency addressed the American 
Chamber of Commerce on their visions for economic policy for 
2004-2008.  The full texts in Spanish 
are available on the SIPRNET site of Embassy Santo Domingo. 
Following is our informal translation of 
a May 2 piece by journalist Carmen Carvajal of the \"Hoy\" 
newspaper, comparing those speeches. 
 
As Carvajal\'s summary makes clear, there was very little 
difference of approach among the candidates; the only 
marked exceptions are the promises of President Mejia to 
reduce income taxes by 40 to 60 percent and 
to promote a 30 percent salary increase -- \"when 
macroeconomic stabilization allows it.\" Each candidate 
avoided fully discussing the upcoming tax reform, which will 
almost inevitably require a sharp increase 
in the value-added tax and a widening of its application. 
 
(begin translation) 
 
Electoral Offers, Macroeconomic stability is the primary goal. 
Hoy, May 2, 2004 
Parties promise to find the revaluation of the family income, 
in order for the Dominicans to improve their quality of life. 
 
Achieving macroeconomic stability, regaining trust at home 
and in foreign capitals, returning to the path of growth and 
reconstituting Dominican purchasing power with the 
stabilization of the peso and improvement of income 
constitute the primary program goals offers of the three 
majority political parties competing in the May 16 elections. 
 
As of press time, only the Dominican Liberation Party (PLD) 
had made available to the press and public a printed 
proposal.  Candidates of the others, the Christian Socialist 
Reform Party (PRSC) and the Dominican Revolutionary Party 
(PRD), presented their offer in speeches brought before the 
members of the American Chamber of Commerce. 
 
In that setting, President Hipolito Mejia, who aspires to 
re-election, and who spoke last on Wednesday the 28th, 
declared that \"our first duty is to return the purchasing 
power to our currency; that the money remain meaningful, 
prices go down and then stabilize, and that the uncertainty 
of the financial crisis caused by others finally end.\" 
 
To achieve this goal, President Mejia sees the need to 
\"attack the causes which shattered price stability and the 
currency exchange rate.\" 
 
For this reason, he said, he will carry out a tax reform and 
direct measures to rationalize public expenditure, \" 
guaranteeing, at all times, that subsidies for the poor will 
not be reduced.\" 
 
As part of his tax reform proposal he includes lower income 
tax and elimination of taxation on inheritances and legacies. 
 Mejia\'s offer includes maintaining and expanding social 
programs destined to improve housing for the poor, issuing 
titles to those occupying state-owned lands and altering the 
focus of some subsidies. 
 
The \"Purple\" Offer of the PLD 
Ex-president Leonel Fernandez, presidential candidate for the 
PLD, presents a proposal suggesting his economic policy is 
geared towards re-establishing stability and a path to growth. 
 
In his speech before the AmCham, Fernandez indicated that if 
he wins the elections, his government will define an 
austerity policy and reduce expenditures.  On the other hand, 
he understands that the biggest challenge of the government 
will be made up of four elements; 
 
- - A fair solution to the quasi-fiscal deficit of Banco 
Central; 
- -  a solution in the short and medium term of financial 
sustainability of the electric sector; 
- -  a realistic approach to the external debt problem; and 
- - a fiscal reform within the context of the FMI agreement 
that will balance public finances and modify the tax 
structure. 
 
The Reformista Program 
 
Eduardo Estrella committed himself to \"push forward a vast 
program of reform and modernization of all productive 
sectors, so Dominicans can feel motivated to invest their 
savings in the development of the Dominican Republic.\" 
 
He will also support the technological modernization of the 
State.  His policy will develop in a frame of \" realism, 
modernism and growth.  It will have a pro-export orientation, 
stimulating production and external commerce.\" 
 
\"This means reducing inflation, reducing production costs and 
inducing the gradual reduction of interest rates on 
investments and the strength of our national currency.\" 
 
Basic Points of the Economic Programs 
 
PLD 
 
Fiscal Policy 
 
Its objectives are guaranteeing fiscal balance and cautious 
and rational management of public finances, improving the 
efficiency, wealth distribution and re-distribution. 
 
It will contribute to creating a macroeconomic framework that 
will make possible stability and sustainable economic growth 
as well as re-establishing faith in participants in the 
economy. 
 
It will sponsor fiscal and tariff reform within the framework 
agreed upon with the FMI.  The basic objective should be to 
\"replace the exorbitant taxes that have been set lately, as 
well as compensating for the major losses arising from the 
Free Trade Agreement with the United States.\" 
 
Concerning revenue, the policy will move toward improving the 
efficiency of tax administration, bettering the country\'s 
capacity to collect taxes and modernizing the functions and 
mechanisms of the system. 
 
When it comes to expenditures, a fiscal program of austerity 
will be applied to adjust spending as well as restructuring 
expenditures to promote equality. 
 
To fulfill these objectives, the fiscal reform will eliminate 
taxes that are difficult to manage and provide low yield, 
will create mechanisms to control tax evasion such as the 
exchange of information, and current \"transitory taxes\" will 
gradually be eliminated. 
 
Quasi-fiscal Deficit 
 
Fernandez proposes that the resources used in bank rescues 
and tied up Central Bank certificates would  cease to be a 
problem, through creating a special entity, separated 
judicially from Central Bank so its operations will not 
affect monetary policy, where all of the assets and 
liabilities of the Central Bank and the Banking 
Superintendency would be transferred. 
 
With the sale of the assets from the bankrupt banks, a 
portion of the funds would be recovered and the rest would be 
covered by the State through a long-term instrument or 
through resorting to an international loan. 
 
Public Debt 
 
As for the public debt, the first thing would be to prevent a 
default or cessation of payments, Fernandez told the AmCham. 
 
His government would press to enlarge the scope of 
renegotiation, and extend the repayment periods to keep 
service of interest and capital repayment from hindering 
improvements to the Dominicans\' quality of life. 
 
His policy would also look to exchange bilateral debts for 
equity investment, especially in the border area, to promote 
progress in that area. 
 
He would reverse the policy to giving priority to external 
debt on preferential terms and would turn to mulitlateral 
institutions to obtain funds at concessional terms. 
 
Monetary Policy 
 
The PLD program plans to create an institutional setting that 
will encourage determination of the rate of exchange through 
competitve market mechanisms that are efficient and 
transparent, establishing a value for the peso that will help 
maintain the internal and external balance in the long and 
short term and reconstitute international reserves. 
 
In order to do this, a PLD government would seek to increase 
earnings in foreign currency, encourage  the return of the 
flight capital, and maintaining a flexible and unified 
market, so that market forces set the rate, creating 
conditions favorable for foreign investment, and supporting 
the export sector. 
 
Energy 
 
In this area, Fernandez favors adjusting distortions in the 
sector so as to guarantee harmonious, sustainable development. 
 
For this, he proposes a \"Compensation Fund for Energy Sector 
Sustainability, which should guarantee the financial 
viability of the sector.\" 
 
The Fund will have as collateral the state-owned shares in 
privatized industries and it would by augmented by 
contributions of the companies, consumers, and multilateral 
institutions. 
He proposes a redefinition of the role of the state in this 
sector.  He said he will propose that the government to 
oversee and regulate the activities of the sector closely, 
\"while it elaborates and approves modern standards 
appropriate for today that will attract and motivate 
investment.\" 
 
PRSC ---- 
 
Fiscal Reform 
Eduardo Estrella, reformist presidential candidate, believes 
that tax reform cannot wait for the August 16 inauguration, 
but must be carried out immediately, taking all possible 
measures to avoid raising unemployment and the cost of food. 
 
This reform itself should be a mechanism for the creation of 
wealth, within a realistic, modern, approach friendly to 
development.  It should also promote exports to stimulate the 
production and trade. 
 
\"This means reducing inflation, lowering production costs and 
bringing about the gradual reduction of interest rates on 
investments and strengthening the value of the peso.\" 
 
Estrella plans to sponsor a Fiscal Responsibility Law that 
will set goals or limits to the levels of domestic and 
foreign debt as well as limiting the fiscal deficit of the 
consolidated public sector. 
 
It will also reduce the discretion of the executive  in 
expenditures, imposing severe sanctions on officials who 
contravene the law. 
 
Energy 
 
Estrella suggests in his program that the energy industries 
work on distributing energy, realizing savings  in the costs 
of operation and improving bill collection, without 
interference from the State.  \"He who supplies the power 
should collect.\" 
 
He would try to improve and expand the capacity of the Energy 
Superintendency to regulate the sector, especially the rates 
the consumer will have to pay. 
 
The companies should offer the users the possibility of 
utilizing meters with a pre-paid system, similar to the 
current telephone system. 
 
Hydroelectric generation will remain in government hands and 
rural electrification and alternative energy sources will be 
promoted. 
 
Debt 
 
Estrella plans to replace a policy of debt financing with one 
of recourse to internal savings.  He would continue the 
renegotiation of the debt with the Paris Club so as to obtain 
deferred payment of 320 million dollars, trying to achieve a 
minimum deferred term of ten years, so as use those resources 
in development projects. 
 
Expatriate Dominicans 
 
Estrella will propose a Law for Investments for the 
Dominicans Abroad that will provide tax exemptions to return 
to the country and make investments that bring foreign 
exchange into the Central Bank.  Among other incentives would 
be a five-year exemption from income tax. 
 
Housing 
 
He proposes a broad plan of construction and financing of 
housing through the Investment Bank for Development and 
Production, using the savings from pension funds and 
insurance companies, through the approach of a \"second-story\" 
banking scheme. 
 
The idea is for the Dominicans to purchase housing with 
long-term financing at low interest rates. 
 
Free Trade Agreement 
 
Estrella will support the free trade agreements and will 
institute a national plan to improve competitiveness as an 
instrument to support  national industry and provide market 
openings for national products and services. 
 
He will propose trade  negotiations with the European Union. 
 
PRD ----- 
 
Fiscal Reform 
 
President Mejia specifies as the primary objective of the 
reform the elimination of the fiscal deficit and the 
establishment of policy of rational spending, in order to 
reduce inflation. 
 
His reform proposals contemplate a reduction in income tax 
from 25 percent to 15 percent , which will benefit  the 
professions and the middle class, as well as industry. 
(EMBASSY NOTE: Mejia said, \"If it were entirely up to me, I 
would reduce it to 10 percent.\") 
 
The tax on inheritances, that is, on estates and legacies, 
will be eliminated. 
 
The maximum tariffs will go down from a maximum of 20 percent 
to 15 percent.  He will also propose an increase in salary of 
30 percent to be approved once macroeconomic stability is 
achieved. 
 
Monetary Policy 
 
President Meja promises to maintain strict control of 
monetary policy, \"Until the fiscal reform begins to generate 
additional income that will assure the elimination of the 
complete deficit of the public sector.\" 
 
Regarding the quasi-fiscal deficit, he said there will be no 
freezing of Central Bank certificates of deposit or 
unilateral cuts on the exchange rates applied for interest 
and principal payments to owners of Central Bank certificates 
denominated in foreign currency. 
 
Investments 
 
National investments in infrastructure will be maintained , 
with the goal of reaching a public annual investment of 5 
percent of GDP, equivalent to 30 trillion pesos. 
 
Maintenance and rehabilitation will be continued on highways, 
 irrigation canals, aqueducts, and local roads. 
The government\'s 1500 construction project currently underway 
throughout the country will be completed. 
 
Energy 
 
A PRD government will seek modification of the Energy Law to 
restructure the industry along lines agreed through a process 
of consensus of all the key players. 
Energy reform will aim at increasing quality of service, 
lowering tariffs, and reaching financial stability, 
eliminating the high subsidies. 
 
A new approach to re-nationalized enterprises will be 
defined, following the report by the special commission, and 
the government will seek support from the World Bank and the 
Inter-American Development Bank to make sure this process is 
carried out transparency. 
 
2.  Translation by Marietta Diaz. 
 
3. (U)  This report and others in our series are available on 
our SIPNET site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/   along with 
extensive other material. 
HERTELL 
"
"16685","5/6/2004 23:32","04SANTODOMINGO2743","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE94861","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 002743 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR, PTER, DR 
SUBJECT: LETTER AND SUMMARY OF DEFICIENCIES AT LAS AMERICAS 
AIRPORT 
 
REF: SECSTATE 94861 
 
 1.  Embassy officers delivered he TSA letter in English on 
Friday, May 2 to the Airport Security Agency (CESA), the 
airport operator AERODOM and to the Civil Aviation Agency. 
English translations of the letter and the annex were 
delivered to all the above on Monday, May 5. 
 
 
HERTELL 
"
"16701","5/7/2004 11:05","04SANTODOMINGO2744","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 002744 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR AND EB/IDF/OMA; 
NSC FOR T. SHANNON AND K. MADISON 
TREASURY FOR N. LEE 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, ECON, EFIN, ENRG 
SUBJECT: IMF TEAM REPORTS STRONG EFFORT BUT MISSED TARGETS 
ON PERFORMANCE CRITERIA 
 
1.  (SBU) Summary: International Monetary Fund review team 
members commented May 5  that despite strong effort, the GODR 
has failed to meet the Fund Standby Agreement performance 
criteria on monetary, fiscal and debt levels.  IMF 
representatives pointed to higher-than-expected first quarter 
inflation, increase in dollar-based energy costs, and the 
weaker-than-expected peso as the primary reasons for not 
meeting the targets.  The team said that the GODR will need 
to present a credible plan to get back on track with the 
agreement in order for the Fund Board to consider waivers 
when the Dominican Republic is next on its agenda, in late 
June.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU) IMF review team leader Jose Fajgenbaum, team member 
Steven Phillips and resident representative Ousmene Mandeng 
briefed the Ambassador and Emboffs May 5 on the Fund\'s 
initial findings from the first formal review of the 
Dominican Republic since the Board approved the revised 
agreement in February.  They reported that the GODR missed 
the performance criteria, but has shown a more focused effort 
since the Paris Club agreement in mid April. 
 
------------------- 
First the Good News 
------------------- 
 
3.  (SBU) The Fund Representatives said that the GODR appears 
to have turned the corner on monetary policy and brought 
inflation under control.  They reported that inflation for 
March was around 2 percent.  (The Central Bank reported 
cumulative inflation for January and February exceeded 24 
percent -- 10 points above projections.)  They gave high 
marks for the Central Bank\'s recent handling of monetary 
policy and said that although the peso was trading lower 
against the dollar than the Agreement had assumed, it has 
remained stable.  They also said that they had not detected a 
surge in election-related spending as many had feared. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Monetary Base Target Will need to Adjust 
---------------------------------------- 
 
4.  (SBU)  Although the Central Bank made progress in 
reducing the monetary base, the representatives said it did 
not make sense to maintain the program levels for base money 
because of the high first quarter inflation.  Nevertheless, 
the team said that the GODR would have to have a clear policy 
outline before the review team could take the issue to the 
IMF Board for a waiver.  The GODR had reduced the monetary 
base by transferring bank reserves into Central Bank 
certificates of deposit, and at the same time increasing the 
vault cash holding requirement for banks to five percent of 
deposits. 
 
5.  (SBU)  When asked about the impact of Baninter 
certificates on the monetary base, the team said that most of 
the certificates were being renewed as they came due.  They 
reported that about RD nine billion ($200 million) of the 
original certificates were coming due soon, but expressed 
confidence that a sufficient amount would be rolled over to 
avoid much impact on the monetary base.  (Note:  RD nine 
billion represents about 13 percent of base money.) 
 
------------------------------ 
Fiscal Target is Biggest Issue 
------------------------------ 
 
6.  (SBU)  The review team members were most concerned about 
the fiscal targets, which they said are really the center of 
the Standby Agreement.  They reported that the GODR would not 
meet the objectives on either the revenue or expenditure 
sides of the fiscal program.  They explained again that this 
was partly the result of shocks, such as inflation, the weak 
peso, high debt-service costs and the increase in oil prices, 
but that the GODR had been slow in responding to those 
shocks.  Moreover, excessive expenditures were also the 
result of misguided policies, such as propane and electricity 
subsidies.  They confirmed what a Central Bank source had 
recently told Emboff that the GODR had blown through 60 
percent of its annual energy subsidy budget in the first 
quarter of the year.  Revenue fell short of the program 
target as well, though they did not specify to what extent. 
The representatives also expressed concern that the GODR is 
delaying payment of bills to make the shortfall appear less 
serious. 
7.  (SBU) Unlike for the monetary side, the team said they 
saw no reason to adjust fiscal targets and said that the IMF 
would no longer accept vague promises.  The GODR would have 
to take further measures -- for example, accelerated tax 
reform -- to adjust for the slippage.  They expressed doubt 
that the GODR would take any action prior to the May 16 
election and that it might be difficult to pass meaningful 
tax reform until after inauguration August 16.  The Fund 
members acknowledged that there has been discussion of tax 
reform issues, but the GODR appeared reluctant to put forward 
a firm proposal during the campaign.  However, the team 
suggested that the GODR would have to take concrete fiscal 
measures before the Fund would consider a waiver. 
 
----------------- 
Too Much New Debt 
----------------- 
 
8.  (SBU) The IMF representatives said that the GODR also 
missed the RD800 million debt target by some RD300 million 
($65 million).  They acknowledged that a large portion of new 
loans have not yet been disbursed, but explained that the IMF 
considers approved loans as part of the debt total.  The team 
left open the possibility that some of the loans could be 
reversed, but also criticized the GODR for not having an 
effective system to monitor loans.  They said that President 
Mejia told Technical Secretary Despradel to overturn anything 
the President approved that did not comply with the IMF 
program.  Despradel told the team that loans were a 
\"procedural headache.\"  The IMF representatives remarked to 
Emboffs that domestic debt, and electricity sector debt, 
particularly, was difficult to monitor due to lack of 
transparency.  This creates problems for both the Fund and 
the World Bank. 
 
-------------- 
Banking Reform 
-------------- 
 
9.  (SBU) A second IMF team is in the Dominican Republic 
reviewing progress on banking reforms.  The Fund 
representatives reported that banking reform is moving 
forward, but there have been delays.  They noted that 
adopting international standards for bank capitalization 
remains an issue and said that there is disagreement among 
the banks -- and between banks and the Superintendent of 
Banks -- on what form standards should take.  The team 
members said that the IMF is providing technical assistance 
in this regard, but at this point some banks are having 
difficulty meeting even local standards. 
 
---------- 
Next Steps 
---------- 
 
10.  (SBU) The GODR will need to present a detailed plan on 
how it will get back in step with the fiscal targets, and 
resolve monetary and debt issues before the Fund Board will 
consider waivers.  The team said that the current fiscal 
program is weak in specifics and that the GODR has a 
credibility problem with the Fund.  Nevertheless, they said 
the Board will likely be sympathetic if the GODR takes 
corrective actions.  The next opportunity for the Board to 
consider the Dominican Republic\'s program is in late June. 
They noted that there will not be further disbursements from 
the IMF before the Board meets. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
11.  (SBU) The IMF representatives seemed cautiously upbeat 
in their assessment of the program, despite the missed 
targets.  They gave the GODR a fair amount of credit for 
effort, and expressed a sympathetic view concerning the 
external shocks.  Nevertheless, the next few months could be 
more difficult.  If Mejia survives the first round of 
presidential elections on May 16, he will be focused on the 
battle for reelection in the second round June 30th.  If he 
loses in the first round, he will have three months left to 
govern before transferring power to a new president.  Either 
scenario will be a severe test of discipline for his 
administration.  End comment. 
 
12. (U) MINIMIZE CONSIDERED 
 
 
HERTELL 
"
"16716","5/7/2004 15:06","04SANTODOMINGO2753","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE102087","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 002753 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), NEA AND PMAT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, AMGT, MOPS 
SUBJECT: ESTABLISHING US MISSION BAGHDAD DELIVERED TO GODR 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 102087 
 
     B. SECSTATE 89241 
 
 (U)  1.  Poloff delivered reftel B points to Ambassador 
Rhadys Abreu de Polanco, Deputy Director for International 
Organizations at the GODR Ministry of Foreign Affairs on 
April 28.  Ambassador Abreu said she would pass on the 
information and would attempt to provide a substantive reply 
in the near future.  To date, Embassy has not received a 
substantive response.  Comment:  With the imminent withdrawal 
of Dominican troops from Iraq, there will be no Dominican 
presence in Iraq.  It is unlikely that the GODR will 
establish a diplomatic mission in Iraq.  End comment. 
HERTELL 
"
"16726","5/7/2004 16:55","04SANTODOMINGO2754","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 002754 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL;NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB; USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD;TREASURY FOR 
OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTIONS #45: INSTITUTIONS - YOU CAN\'T 
TELL THE PLAYERS WITHOUT A PROGRAM 
 
1. (SBU)  Following is number 45 in our series on the 
Dominican presidential elections: 
 
Institutions - - You Can,t Tell the Players without a Program 
 
The Dominican elections authority is one of the least well 
established in the hemisphere, a legacy of the long years of 
dictatorship, personalistic party politics, and the lack of a 
permanent civil service.  The elements of the current 
structure date to the 1980,s.  Distrust with the system has 
prompted over time the formation of interest groups and ad 
hoc associations that seek to influence public opinion in 
order to oblige the elections authority to assure acceptable 
elections. 
 
To help with the handicapping for the May 16 elections, here 
is a summary of the institutions most directly involved in 
them: 
 
Junta Central Electoral.   The JCE lacks institutional 
autonomy and credibility.  The Senate appoints members and 
alternates for four-year terms shortly after a new Senate 
takes office (under the current schedule, halfway through a 
presidential term).  Appointments expire with the Senate, 
although reappointments by the following Senate are not 
uncommon.  The selection process is  highly partisan, and 
since JCE judges are on a 4-year short leash, they have 
correspondingly less of an opportunity to transcend party 
politics.   The 5 members of JCE appointed after the 1994 
electoral disaster were generally regarded as persons of 
integrity and carried out a successful 1996 election.  For 
the 2000 election the PRD-dominated Senate of 1998 named 5 
PRD sympathizers and expanded the body from 5 to 7, adding 
one judge from each of the other parties.  In 2003 after 
party quarreling prompted the resignation of the JCE 
president, the Senate, still PRD-dominated, expanded the 
number from 7 to the current 9 (again, yielding to PLD and 
PRSC pressures for representation).  The Senate defined a new 
structure, assigning 3 judges responsibilities for the 
administrative chamber and 5 to the dispute review panel 
(\"camara contentiosa\").  Formal petitions for redress are 
considered by the plenary of 9 chaired by JCE President Luis 
Arias.  A judge may recuse himself and call in his alternate 
but this is rare. 
 
The JCE,s functions are self-contradictory.  It is 
responsible for organizing elections, overseeing the 
elections, and judging any disputes.  There is no appeal 
beyond the JCE; under terms of the electoral law, not even 
the Supreme Court has jurisdiction over electoral matters. 
 
Contests over rules.  These institutional realities drive 
political parties to contend over the rules, as occurred in 
the February-March \"ley de lemas\" initiative in which the 
ruling PRD sought, unsuccessfully, to change procedures for 
the first round of presidential elections to convert it into 
a selection among parties rather than among candidates.  In 
similar fashion, there are draft proposals circulating 
currently within the PRD-dominated Congress to align 
presidential and congressional elections - - by extending 
current congressional terms by two years to 2008. 
 
- - The Civil Society Monitoring Committee (\"Comision de 
Seguimiento\") continues a tradition begun in the mid-1980,s 
at the initiative of Catholic academic Monsignor Agripino 
Nunez Collado.  Nunez initiated civil mediation in 1986 in 
consort with the editors of leading newspapers \"El Caribe\" 
and \"Listin Diario.\"  Their  pioneering effort exerted 
significant influence.  Monsignor Nunez, now rector of a 
leading catholic university, has been engaged in mediation 
for every national election since that time.  In the 2000 and 
2002 elections, he set up a formal \"Civil Society Monitoring 
Comittee\" under his chairmanship. The 2004 edition includes 
the Monsignor, his vice rector, heads of four business 
organizations, a noted surgeon and the head of the 
evangelical church association.  Over the past six months the 
Commission has provided the only venue at which the three 
principal presidential candidates have met - - twice, to the 
great satisfaction of photojournalists, to sign pacts drafted 
by the Commission enjoining them to proper conduct in their 
campaigns.  The Commission has made a notably positive 
contribution in setting up the uncompensated technical 
commission of computer systems experts that counseled the 
JCE. 
 
Nunez enjoys considerable prestige but over the years his 
gentle scolding has gradually lost its impact.  Other 
organizations have become active; Nunez is perceived by some 
as biased in his political preferences. The Commission\'s 
pacts have done little to alter the conduct of the candidates 
or of the parties.  When the Ambassador invited the full 
Commission to a luncheon discussion on April 29, the members 
were happy to talk politics in general but they had no 
cohesive approach to the subject. 
 
- - The Catholic Church. The Dominican Church has been 
generally non-controversial about the elections.  The Church 
has enjoyed a cozy relationship with government since 
Trujillo recognized it as the official state-sponsored church 
and formally committed to provide direct subsidies to the 
institution.  This arrangement survived despite the bishops, 
repudiation of Trujillo in the 1960,s.  The Conference of 
Bishops has periodically issued written declarations, 
including a December missive that went so far as to suggest 
obliquely that President Mejia reconsider his decision to 
seek a second term.  Homilies and comments from Cardinal 
Nicholas de Jesus Rodriguez and senior theologian Fr. Arnaez 
regularly play in the press.  They focus on ethical and 
humanitarian values generally, choosing no political 
favorites.  One interesting point -- the Cardinal, as titular 
head of the system of military chaplains, holds flag rank in 
the Dominican armed forces. 
 
- -Civic NGOs.  Non-governmental organization Participacion 
Ciudadana (PC), founded in the early 1990,s, has been a 
vigorous advocate of electoral transparency, supported in 
recent years by USG funding through USAID.  PC has trained 
electoral observers for every polling station nation-wide and 
carries out a &quick count8 that in 2000 and 2002 was 
within one percent of the vote tallies later certified.  PC 
recently published an analysis of 20 years of corruption 
cases that documented the fact that in more than 100 
prosecutions, only one defendant actually served time.   The 
Foundation for Institution-building and Justice (FINJUS) has 
a similar approach to elections, articulated by influential 
young activist lawyers - - this is the group that persuaded 
the three candidates to address their forum on their views on 
the theme of corruption.  These two NGOs are the engines of 
the \"Civic Forum\" of more than 150 community organizations 
and of the umbrella Coalition for Transparency and 
Institutionality.  These coalitions mounted demonstrations 
that helped to block the \"ley de lemas\" proposal in February. 
 The Coalition is currently gathering opposition to a 
proposal in Congress to redraw the boundaries of national 
parks so as to open beach lands for commercial development. 
 
- -Business Groups.  The senior group is the Council of 
Entrepreneurs (CONEP) presided by Elena Viyella de Paliza, 
and the junior one is the Young Entrepreneurs Association 
(ANJE) headed by Manuel Diez.  Each is active in organizing 
conferences and activities that regularly provide their 
leaders platforms for public pronouncements defending 
business interests.  The American Chamber of Commerce 
(AmCham), presided by Verizon telecoms president Jorge Ivan 
Ramirez (a Colombian national) is politically engaged, 
generally through luncheons, monthly or more often, that 
feature prominent speakers (including, in sequence, each of 
the three candidates).  AmCham president Ramirez delivers 
membership views on current topics but these usually get 
limited press play, given the general nature of most of his 
remarks.  Sectoral business associations have a lower 
profile; these include, for example, those of industrialists, 
hotel operators and free zone operators. 
 
- - Labor and Popular Associations.  The labor movement is 
relatively low profile in the country, and strikes at 
enterprises or in specific economic sectors are rare.  The 
national work stoppages in November and January near public 
holidays were proposed and successfully publicized by a 
consortium of leftist-leaning \"popular associations\" from 
neighborhoods, the transporters\' and drivers\' associations 
and individual labor activists.  Those expressions of 
nationwide discontent with inflation and electricity 
blackouts carried complaints about the performance of 
theMejia administration but were not specifically anti-Mejia. 
 
 
A different approach is that of the College of Physicians, 
with an agenda influenced by health workers in public 
institutions.  Their work stoppages and demonstrations at 
public hospitals before Easter demanded a doubling in salary 
and had an anti-Mejia tinge.  That view has become more 
pronounced.  Colegio president Dr. Waldo Ariel Suero has told 
the press that President Mejia failed to deliver on his 
pre-Easter promise to put a bill forward in Congress to get 
salary increases.  The Colegio and associated service unions 
in the public health sector are undertaking a six-day strike 
to coincide with the final week of campaigning.  (On May 7 
President of the House of Representatives Alfredo Pacheco 
indicated to the DCM that the Colegio may, after all, 
postpone until after the elections.) 
 
- -The Security Forces.   This is a thoroughly politicized 
institution, even though the Constitution prohibits military 
engagement in politics and members of the armed forces do not 
have the right to vote.  President Mejia,s promotions have 
created a general officer corps of close to 200 for an 
enlisted corps of only about 40,000.  Secretary of the Armed 
Forces MG Soto Jimenez publicly insists on the apolitical 
mission of the military but he and the service chiefs are all 
political animals who owe their advancement to their PRD 
connections.  The National Police are somewhat less top heavy 
(50 generals for 27,000 police) and therefore less directly 
dependent upon the electoral outcome.  It appears that 
despite persistent rumors to the contrary, the institutions 
are training and planning for full orthodox support to the 
elections.  In the event of a Fernandez victory, however, 
many in the leadership would be likely to face speedy 
retirement. 
 
- -Congress.   Congress was the scene in February and March 
of the \"ley de lemas\" struggle by the PRD to get changes to 
the electoral law.  That was derailed both by civic 
opposition and by the pragmatic reality that the elections 
were simply too close for fundamental procedural changes. 
The PRD owns the Senate almost entire and has a strong 
presence in the House of Representatives; one benefit is that 
members of congress can designate a certain amount of direct 
government subsidy to local associations and NGOs.  The 
current PRD-dominated Congress remains in office until 2006 
(that is, under the current Constitution and laws). 
 
- - And, finally, the political parties themselves.  Party 
faithful take inspiration in their leaders but are also 
motivated  by the prospect of government jobs.  Since there 
is virtually no permanent civilian career government service, 
a change of president entails a vast turnover in government 
employment.  A change of president and transition period to a 
new administration on August 16 would be marked by far 
greater government inefficiency than usual, potentially 
accompanied by theft of government assets. 
 
2. (U)  Drafted by Mchael Meigs. 
 
3.  (U)  This report and other election reporting is 
available on our SIPRNET website at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo< /a>          along 
with extensive other material. 
HERTELL 
"
"16730","5/7/2004 20:43","04SANTODOMINGO2761","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 002761 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/PPC AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI; USSOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ECON, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTIONS #47 (REVISED): THE EXPENDITURE 
COST OF DEMOCRACY 
 
 
1.  (SBU) This is no. 47 in our series on the Dominican 
presidential elections: 
 
The Expenditure Cost of Democracy 
 
Dominicans have lived in an increasing tempest of campaign 
advertising over the past eight months.  Just how much money 
is being spent is unclear, as is the origin of private 
contributions to political parties.  A prominent politician 
told us May 6 that total campaign expenditures by his major 
party would reach one billion pesos (USD 20 million); he 
guessed that the other two big parties were spending 
similarly. 
 
Such outlays have transformed the country\'s physical and 
audiovisual landscapes with images of candidates -- 
principally of the leading three, but also of the minor 
hopefuls.  In a country with a monthly minimum wage of less 
than USD 100, over most of the last year the parties have 
lined major highways and urban thoroughfares with large 
billboards costing an average of 100,000 pesos (USD 2000) a 
month.  Prime air-time, currently being consumed in great 
amounts, costs 200,000 pesos (USD 4000) an hour.  And these 
are the costs only of rental of space or time, exclusive of 
the conceptual, creative, and marketing services. By any 
estimate, spending on ads signficantly exceeds the public 
subsidies granted to the parties. 
 
On April 7th, the Central Election Board (JCE) distributed 
the government\'s public sharing funds in the amount of nearly 
413 million pesos (USD 8.3 million) for the 23 political 
parties. The formula for the distribution of money is 
two-fold: 
 
-- 25 percent of the money (103 million pesos)(USD 2.1m) is 
divided equally among all registered parties; and 
 
-- 75 percent (310 million pesos)(USD 6.2m) is distributed 
according to the relative numbers of votes obtained in the 
two previous general elections - in this case, the 2000 
presidential election and the 2002 congressional and 
municipal elections. 
 
Since the three major parties captured 96 percent of voter 
preferences, the PRD received 139.6 million pesos (USD 
2.79m), the PLD 83.9 million pesos (USD 1.68m), and the PRSC 
81.9 million pesos (USD 1.64m). 
 
The 1997 Electoral Law stipulates that a party must account 
for all of its income and expenditures to receive public 
funds, but not every party has fulfilled this requirement. 
During his visit in March, OAS observer mission chief 
Santiago Murray reminded candidates of the need to document 
campaign spending. The Central Electoral Board (JCE) appears 
to be relatively indulgent concerning accuracy and timeliness 
of reporting, leading to persistent inter-party accusations 
of fraud, not easily subject to evaluation. 
 
Opponents have maintained that President Mejia has used 
government funds for his campaign and advertising; however, 
on May 6 the visiting IMF review team told the Ambassador 
that government financial records through March do not show 
any such diversion.  At the same time, none of the parties is 
publicly identifying major private contributors or amounts 
given. The common wisdom is that most major businesses have 
lines of financing and influence to all three big parties. 
According to public records for September 2003 - January 
2004, Mejia as incumbent president outspent other parties on 
pre-campaigning nearly 2 to 1: almost 73 million pesos (USD 
1.5m) compared with the PLD\'s 38 million pesos (USD 780,000). 
 It is not clear how much of this was devoted to Mejia\'s 
vigorous defense against other PRD rivals, which culminated 
only in January. 
 
Private sources of funding include business appeals and 
fundraiser events. Parties seek donors primarily in the 
Dominican Republic and the United States, especially in 
Puerto Rico. For example, during President Mejia\'s brief 
Easter trip to the United States, campaign dinners charged an 
average of RD $500,000 (USD 10,000) per plate. 
 
Funds are raised primarily to meet advertising expenses for 
radio, television, and print media. Over the past five 
months, it is estimated that parties spent at least 159 
million pesos(USD 3.2m) on advertising, equivalent to nearly 
40 percent of all JCE allotments. From September 2003 to 
January 2004, the PRD invested almost 56 million pesos (USD 
1.1m) in television ads - followed by the PRSC at 35 million 
pesos (USD 700,000) and the PLD at 32 million (USD 640,000). 
 
In this discussion we neglect entirely party expenditures on 
logistics, vehicles, publications, hall rental, simple 
handouts and all the other expenses of doing partisan 
business. The exact costs of the campaigns are essentially 
unknown, except to the managers, and given the laxity of 
financial accounting in the country, perhaps not even to 
them.  There is a good deal of ad-hoc fundraising -- for 
example, President Mejia reportedly has turned to the Spanish 
owner of Air Europa to arrange and contribute return 
transportation of the Dominican \"Quisqueya battalion\" of 302 
soldiers.  This handsome donation, probably never to be 
costed for the accounts, will allow the President to fulfill 
his promise of getting the boys back home before the election. 
 
Though one would like to see such large sums - perhaps as 
much as USD 20 million spent by each major party -- going 
into productive investment rather than rival expenditure, 
they do not represent a complete waste. Taken in a time of 
economic contraction and inflation, campaign expenditures 
have delivered a useful counter-cyclical stimulus with 
significant multiplier effects. And, when all is said and 
done - and counted -  the cost of campaigning is part of the 
price of democracy. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Leticia Cantu, Michael Meigs. 
 
3. (U)  This report and others in our series are available on 
our SIPNET site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/   along with 
extensive other material. 
HERTELL 
"
"16776","5/10/2004 16:54","04SANTODOMINGO2821","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO2223","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 002821 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), WHA/PPSC, EB/OMA; 
TREASURY FOR LAMONICA, RTOLOUI; DHS PASS MIAMI FOR 
RFUENTES; DHS ALSO FOR CIS - CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, PGOV, PREL, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN BANKING SERIES # 06: \"RAMONCITO\" GOES TO 
TRIAL 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 2223 
 
1.  (U)  This is cable # 6 in a periodic series on the 
banking sector in the Dominican Republic.  Sensitive but 
unclassified, entire text. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 \"RAMONCITO\" SENT TO TRIAL IN THE BANINTER CASE 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
What\'s new: a summary of the bank cases in the Dominican 
Republic 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
In a mixed decision issued on April 26, Judge of Instruction 
Eduardo Sanchez Ortiz ruled that enough evidence of 
wrongdoing exists against Ramon Baez Figueroa and Marcos Baez 
Cocco to send them to trial on charges of criminal fraud and 
mismanagement of Baninter.  Sanchez Ortiz dismissed all 
criminal charges against Luis Alvarez Renta, Vivian Lubrano 
de Castillo and Jesus Troncoso Ferrua.  Attorneys for the 
GODR and the Ramon Baez and Marcos Baez defense team have 
filed appeals.  Luis Alvarez Renta\'s legal team has placed 
full page ads in the local press saying, in essence, \"I told 
you so - I didn\'t do it.\" 
 
The Bancredito case continues, with the assigned judge of 
instruction compelling witnesses to appear and compiling 
evidence in the case.  Banco Mercantil became the third bank 
to have its executives implicated in fraudulent activities. 
On April 16, attorneys for the GODR Central Bank filed 
charges against six former executives. The new case is also 
with a judge of instruction. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Baninter: decisions, appeals and new charges 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
Judge Sanchez Ortiz\'s decision that sufficient evidence 
exists to indict Ramon Baez and Marcos Baez comes after 9 
months of work.  He was slowed by the complexity of the case, 
but also hampered by legal maneuvering by the Baez defense 
team, the Alvarez Renta defense team, and the Central Bank 
(CB) attorneys.  The technically complicated case required 
numerous requests for extension by Sanchez Ortiz in order to 
review voluminous documentation and learn the basics of how 
to treat complex fraud cases.  The legal wrangling by all 
parties was par for the course, for these are high powered 
defendants, with high powered and high priced attorneys. 
 
The judge\'s decision to drop all criminal charges against 
Luis Alvarez Renta is disappointing but not unexpected. 
Alvarez Renta was the only defendant who did not hold an 
executive position within Baninter.  More surprising and 
disappointing is the decision to drop all criminal charges 
against Lubrano and Troncoso, respectively vice president and 
legal counsel for the bank.  CB attorneys have appealed the 
decision of Sanchez Ortiz to drop all charges against Alvarez 
Renta, Lubrano and Troncoso, so the case against them remains 
active. 
 
The CB attorneys have also appealed the jurisdiction of the 
appeals court.  They  took this portion of their appeal 
directly to the Dominican Supreme Court, asking that any 
appeals to the Baninter case be removed from the First Penal 
Court of Appeals to another Dominican Court of Appeals. 
Meanwhile, the Baez defense team filed a second petition to 
recuse Sanchez Ortiz from the case (an earlier petition was 
denied).  Sanchez Ortiz made his substantive decision in the 
case before the second recusal petition was heard.  The 
recusal petition went to the First Penal Court of Appeals for 
argument on April 30, and the Court announced on May 3 that 
it would stay its decision on the recusal issue, until the 
Supreme Court ruled on the CB\'s appeal to remove all appeals 
from its purview. The Baez defense team covered all bases, 
also appealing the indictment of Ramon Baez and Marcos Baez. 
 
The CB attorneys have filed another criminal complaint 
against a Baninter actor.  On May 3, the team filed, with the 
court administrator for criminal cases, a complaint alleging 
embezzlement by Americo Bogaert Marra, former Baninter vice 
president in charge of credit card operations.  The complaint 
alleges Bogaert embezzled, stole, or otherwise committed 
fraud in the amounts on RD $1,209,784 pesos (about USD 
26,000) and USD 10,380. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
Justice Begins to Work 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
These events represent an initial and tentative success for 
the Dominican judicial system.  Many individuals (government 
officials, private businesspeople, attorneys, and others) 
told us that they did not expect any of the players to be 
indicted.  Two out of five isn\'t a great ratio of indictments 
to dismissals, but it beats zero out of five on any day.  A 
second positive is the persistence of the CB attorneys.  The 
immediate appeal of the dismissal of the case against Alvarez 
Renta, Lubrano and Troncoso, along with the filing of a 
second complaint against a former Baninter executive within a 
week of Sanchez Ortiz\'s decision, indicates to all that the 
CB lawyers intend to keep the fire stoked and the pressure 
on.  The most important audience may be the general public - 
who now see through press reports that the GODR is not 
letting bank fraud cases slip quietly out to sea without at 
least making an attempt to keep on shore and active. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
Bancredito and Banco Mercantil: Two cases in the early stages 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
The Bancredito case continues in the preliminary stages with 
Judge Annikssa Serra de la Mota serving as the judge of 
instruction charged with gathering evidence in the case.  In 
April Judge Serra de la Mota ordered the arrest of former 
Bancredito President Manuel Arturo Pellerano and former vice 
president Juan Felipe Mendoza. The arrest warrants were 
issued to compel the former executives to appear and testify 
in front of her.  Mendoza complied, subjected himself to 
interrogation by the judge and was released.  After a full 
day of questioning, he told the press, \"I\'m free and I hope 
to remain free because no innocent person should be 
detained.\" 
 
The warrant against Pellerano could not be served because he 
was not in the Dominican Republic.  Mendoza told the press 
that Pellerano was out of the country with his ailing father, 
who is receiving unspecified medical treatment.  Pellerano 
has yet to appear in front of Judge Serra de la Mota. 
 
The criminal charges against former Banco Mercantil 
executives mark the third bank targeted by the CB attorneys 
within the past year.  On April 16, CB attorneys filed 
criminal fraud charges against six former Mercantil 
executives, alleging fraud in the amount of RD $6.5 billion 
pesos.  Charges were brought against former Mercantil 
President, Andres Alejando Aybar Baez; vice president of 
administration and finance, Evelyn Perez Montandon; vice 
president of operations and technology, Ramon Aref Henriquez 
Risk; vice president in charge of auditing and security, Jose 
Manuel Mateo Contreras; and vice president of financial 
control, Rafael Maximiliano Moya Hernandez. 
 
The alleged fraud took place during 2002 and 2003, prior to 
the October 2003 sale of the majority of Mercantil\'s shares 
to the Republic Bank Limited of Trinidad and Tobago.  The CB 
complaint avers that financial assistance given to Banco 
Mercantil by the Central Bank at a time when Mercantil was 
suffering liquidity problems, went, in large part, to line 
the pockets of the bank executives. 
 
Continued movement in the Bancredito and Banco Mercantil 
cases is a further sign of the GODR\'s attempts to prosecute 
complex banking and fraud cases.  These types of cases are 
still new to the Dominican judicial system, and there will be 
hurdles to obtaining convictions.  Nevertheless, exposing 
more judges to complex bank fraud cases, attempting to hold 
criminal bankers accountable for their actions, and working 
towards the return of some of the misappropriated funds to 
the CB coffers, can all be seen as signs of progress. 
-------------------------- 
Where do we go from here? 
-------------------------- 
 
The Dominican government\'s civil case in the Southern 
District of Florida against Alvarez Renta remains active.  So 
does the criminal investigation into possible money 
laundering by the Baninter principals.  Embassy officers 
continue to stress the importance of convictions in the 
Dominican Republic and remind contacts that any money 
laundering case in the U.S. will be easier to prove if there 
are convictions in the Dominican Republic.  We also continue 
to emphasize the devastating effect on the economy of the 
bank frauds. 
 
Even so, we are all too aware that many Dominicans have very 
little faith in their judicial system (particularly when it 
comes to corruption cases) and that even as the cases move 
forward through the courts, convictions and appropriate 
punishment and restitution are not assured. 
 
2.  (U) Drafted by Angela Kerwin. 
 
3.  (U) This report and others in the series are available on 
the classified SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo< /a> along with 
extensive other material. 
HERTELL 
"
"16789","5/11/2004 11:04","04SANTODOMINGO2843","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 002843 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI; USSOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION # 46:  ESTRELLA, WOULD-BE STAR 
 
1. (SBU)  This is cable # 46 in our series on the Dominican 
presidential election: 
 
ESTRELLA, WOULD-BE STAR 
 
------------------------ 
Heading for third place 
------------------------ 
 
In the last week before the presidential election, Reformista 
candidate Eduardo Estrella continues to work the campaign 
trail with the remaining PRSC faithful. Estrella is smart, 
has a good resume, and photographs well, but as a public 
speaker lacks animation, mumbles and rarely rallies the 
crowd.  The deep division of his party and his reluctance to 
promise or rant reinforce long-held expectations that on May 
16 he will place third in a three-horse race. 
 
Estrella will become a factor if there is a second round - 
that is, if no candidate wins more than 50 percent of the 
votes on May 16.  He insists he will place second and run 
against Fernandez until June 30. It is more likely that he 
will face the unappealing decision whether or not to throw 
his support behind Mejia or Fernandez. That choice will be 
hard: he will have to decide whether to follow treachery into 
the PLD, to endorse a PRD that he has scorned, or to sit out 
the contest.  In the event of a second round, Mejia will be 
looking to cut a deal with him -- exactly the sort of 
politics that Estrella has rebuffed.  Nonetheless, many of 
our contacts believe he will cast his lot with Mejia. 
 
Estrella\'s party was plagued from the outset with an internal 
squabble over rival candidate  Jacinto Peynado, VP to the 
late PRSC strongman Balaguer, PRSC presidental candidate in 
2000 and probably the most popular Reformista leader after 
Balaguer\'s death in 2002. Peynado battled for his party\'s 
endorsement and continued to fight for it after a PRSC 
primary in 2003 went in favor of Estrella. Peynado, gravely 
ill in Miami over most of the last year, gave up his quest 
for the Palace and said he would not endorse any candidate. 
In February, old-school PRSC leaders Carlos Morales Troncoso, 
Donald Reid Cabral and Leonardo Matos Berrido publicly backed 
Fernandez; in March Peynado changed his mind and followed 
suit.  The PRSC seniors have told emboffs that Fernandez has 
promised \"several secretariats\" and some \"municipal jobs\" to 
the former Reformistas. 
 
Estrella, talented but self-effacing, had fame thrust upon 
him when the inner circle from Balaguer\'s former 
administraton looked for a candidate younger, cleaner, 
healthier and more electable than Peynado.  At lunch with 
Embassy officers late last year, Estrella made small talk and 
left the big picture to his advisors, former Foreign Minister 
Victor Gomez Berges and PRSC political secretary Johnny 
Jones.  Estrella is sensitive and almost painfully shy (even 
his secretary said so in a phone call with EcoPol counselor). 
This quality may appeal to Reformistas, with their reverent 
memories of the engimatic, withdrawn Balaguer who cunningly 
ruled the country for 22 years and left his personal stamp on 
Dominican politics. 
 
Estrella\'s acceptance of the nomination and his determined 
campaigning show self-mastery and intellectual courage.  He 
has a reputation for honesty and good management, and we tend 
to believe his assertion that \"millions and millions of pesos 
went through my hands and not a single peso went into my 
pocket.\"  Estrella\'s April 14 comments to the American 
Chamber of Commerce condemning corruption carried weight (see 
text on our SIPRNET site). 
Estrella\'s billboards show him against a backdrop of PRSC red 
with a tight-lipped, reproachful expression and admonitory 
pointed finger over the slogan, \"The country cannot put up 
with this any more!\" (\"El pais no aguanta mas!\")  To his 
disadvantage, most Dominican voters are focused on their 
symptoms of economic distress rather than on domestic 
mismanagement or corruption.  Many pay lip service to the 
principles of good governance, but wink at or engage in a 
partisan scramble for government favors and jobs. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Engineer to politician - a brief bio 
------------------------------------ 
 
Eduardo Estrella Sadhala is from the second largest city in 
the Dominican Republic, Santiago, known as a breeding ground 
for politicians.  He comes from a prominent family that 
protected opponents of Rafael Trujillo\'s 1930-61 
dictatorship.  His father and grandfather were senior 
military officers, and an uncle was among the conspirators 
who assassinated Trujillo -- a group now revered as national 
heroes. 
 
Estrella graduated from the Autonomous University of Mexico 
(UNAM) with a civil engineering degree, and PRSC President 
Balaguer appointed him second secretary at the Dominican 
Embassy in Mexico City.  Estrella returned to the Santiago 
area and served as president of the Northern Regional 
Dominican School of Engineers, Architects and Surveyors. 
Elected as Santiago\'s senator in 1986, he was appointed by 
Balaguer as Under Secretary for Public Works and 
Communications and in 1991 advanced to Secretary of State for 
Public Works and Communications, a post he held until 1994. 
Estrella returned to his elected position in the Senate from 
1994-1998. 
 
Estrella was born on June 5, 1953.  He is married to Arelis 
Cruz de Estrella and they have three children. 
 
2.  (U) Drafted by Angela Kerwin, Michael Meigs. 
 
3.  (SBU) This report and others in the series are available 
on the classified SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/  along with 
extensive other material. 
HERTELL 
"
"16911","5/14/2004 12:55","04SANTODOMINGO2918","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 002918 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL;NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON; 
LABOR FOR ILAB; USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD;TREASURY FOR 
OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT:  DOMINICAN ELECTIONS #47: THE EXPENDITURE COST OF 
DEMOCRACY 
 
 
1.  (SBU) This is no. 47 in our series on the Dominican 
presidential elections: 
 
The Expenditure Cost of Democracy 
 
Dominicans have lived in an increasing tempest of campaign 
advertising over the past eight months.  Just how much is 
being spent is unclear, as is the origin of private 
contributions to political parties.  But the physical and 
audiovisual landscapes of the country have been transformed 
with images of candidates -- principally of the leading three 
but also of the minor hopefuls.  In a country with a monthly 
minimum wage of less than USD 100, over most of the last year 
the parties have lined major highways and urban thoroughfares 
with large billboards costing an average of 100,000 pesos 
(USD 2000) a month.  Prime air-time, currently being consumed 
in great amounts, costs 200,000 pesos (USD 4000) an hour. And 
these are the costs only of rental of space or time, 
exclusive of the conceptual, creative, and marketing 
services. By any estimate, spending on ads signficantly 
exceeds the public subsidies granted to the parties. 
 
On April 7th, the Central Election Board (JCE) distributed 
the government\'s public sharing funds in the amount of nearly 
413 million pesos (USD 8 million) for the 23 political 
parties. The formula for the distribution of money is 
two-fold: 
 
--- 25 percent of the money (103 million pesos)(USD 2m) is 
divided equally among all registered parties. 
 
--- 75 percent (310 million pesos)(USD 6m) is distributed 
according to a formula for the number of votes obtained in 
two previous general elections - specifically the 2000 
presidential election and the 2002 congressional and 
municipal elections 
 
Since the three major parties captured 96 percent of voter 
preferences, the PRD received 139.6 million pesos (USD 
2.48m), the PLD 83.9 million pesos(USD 1.7m), and the PRSC 
81.9 million pesos (USD 1.65m). 
 
The 1997 Elections law stipulates that a party must account 
for all of its income and expenditures to receive electoral 
funds, but not every party has fulfilled this requirement. 
During his earliest call in March OAS observer mission chief 
Santiago Murray reminded candidates of the need to document 
campaign spending. The JCE appears to be relatively indulgent 
concerning accuracy and timeliness of reporting, leading to 
persistent inter-party accusations of fraud, not easily 
subject to evaluation. 
 
Opponents have maintained that President Mejia has used 
government funds for his campaign and advertising; on May 6 
the visiting IMF review team told the Ambassador that 
government financial records through March do not show any 
such diversion. At the same time, none of the parties is 
publicly identifying major private contributors or amounts 
given. The common wisdom is that most major businesses have 
lines of financing and influence to all three big parties. 
 
According to public records for September 2003 - January 2004 
Mejia as incumbent president outspent other parties on 
pre-campaigning nearly 2 to 1: nearly 73 million pesos (USD 
1.4m) compared to the PLD\'s 38 million pesos (USD 76,000). 
It is not clear how much of this was devoted to Mejia\'s 
vigorous defense against other PRD rivals, which culminated 
only in January. 
 
Private sources of funding include business appeals and 
fundraiser events. Parties seek donors primarily in the 
Dominican Republic and the United States, including 
especially in Puerto Rico. For example, during President 
Mejia\'s brief Easter trip to the United States, campaign 
dinners charged an average of RD $500,000 (USD 10,000) per 
plate. 
 
Funds are raised primarily to meet advertising expenses for 
radio, television, and print media. Over the past five 
months, it is estimated that parties spent at least 159 
million pesos(USD 3.1m) on advertising, equivalent to nearly 
40 percent of all JCE allotments. From September 2003- 
January 2004, the PRD invested almost 56 million pesos (USD 
1m) in television ads - followed by the PRSC at 35 million 
pesos (USD 700,000) and the PLD at 32 million million(USD 
64,000). 
 
In this discussion we neglect entirely party expenditures on 
logistics, vehicles, publications, hall rental, publications, 
simple handouts and all the other expenses of doing partisan 
business. The costs of the campaigns are essentially unknown, 
except to the managers, and given the laxity of financial 
accounting in the country, perhaps not even to them.  There 
is a good deal of ad-hoc fundraising -- for example, 
President Mejia reportedly has turned to the Spanish owner of 
Air Europa to arrange and contribute return transportation of 
the Dominican \"Quisqueya battallion\" of 302 soldiers.  This 
handsome donation, probably never to be costed for the 
accounts, will allow the President to fulfill his promise of 
getting the boys back home before the election. 
 
Though one would like to see such large sums - perhaps as 
much as USD 20 million spent by each major party -- going 
into productive investment rather than rival expenditure, 
they do not represent a complete waste. Taken in a time of 
economic contraction and inflation, campaign expenditures 
have delivered a useful counter-cyclical stimulus with 
significant multiplier effects. And, when all is said and 
done - and counted -  the cost of campaigning is part of the 
price of democracy. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Leticia Cantu, Michael Meigs. 
 
3. (U)  This report and others in our series are available on 
our SIPRNET site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/   along with 
extensive other material. 
HERTELL 
"
"16925","5/14/2004 16:12","04SANTODOMINGO2925","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 002925 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL;NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB; USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD;TREASURY FOR 
OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTIONS #48: SCENESETTER FOR MAY 16 
PRESIDENTIAL VOTE 
 
 
1.  (SBU) Following is number 48 in our Dominican elections 
series: 
 
Scenesetter for May 16 Presidential Vote 
 
Celebrations and Movement 
 
Santo Domingo was the scene on successive days this week of 
tumultuous street rallies for the three major presidential 
candidates.  The atmosphere was that of a fiesta, appropriate 
for a country that usually turns in a voter participation 
level of between 75 and 80 percent.   By law, campaign 
activities end on Friday, May 14.  The country is on election 
holiday from midday, Saturday, May 15, through Monday, May 17. 
 
Saturday will be a day of extensive movement, as many city 
dwellers return to their places of origin.  International 
observers will be dispersing across the country, as well, 
including some of the 53 volunteers from the U.S. Embassy 
community, duly accredited by the Central Electoral Board 
(JCE) through the OAS observer mission. 
 
Election material has been delivered to municipal electoral 
boards during the week, apparently without major incident. 
Security is provided for the materials, for 134 municipal 
boards, and for 12,000 voting places by the Electoral Police, 
a specially constituted body of some 34,000 police and armed 
forces personnel reporting through an independent chain of 
command directly to the president of the JCE Luis Arias. 
(More than 100 actively serving flag-rank military officers 
have signed a declaration that they will support the 
decisions of the JCE ) more a commentary on the country,s 
pre-election nerves than on the orientation of the military.) 
 
Where We,ll Be 
 
All 53 Embassy and American community OAS-affiliated 
observers received 3 hours of training earlier this week and 
will work in close consultation with OAS regional 
coordinators.  Some will participate in the OAS \"quick 
count,\" which entails only phoning in the results of the 
selected voting place to the OAS office in Santo Domingo. 
Twenty will work outside Santo Domingo.  All are to be 
present at the 6:00 a.m. opening of a pre-selected voting 
place, to circulate for observation in the city throughout 
the day, to make contact with the municipal election board, 
to return to the pre-selected voting place to witness the 
count, to accompany the materials and officials to the 
municipal board and to remain as observer while municipal 
results are transmitted to the JCE computer center in Santo 
Domingo.  They will use OAS forms and reporting channels to 
document their visits and any irregularities encountered; any 
major irregularities or disruptions are to be reported by 
cell phone to one of the senior OAS observers. 
 
An Embassy \"Election Coordination Central\" will function at 
the DCM residence with a staff ranging from two to six 
persons.  Embassy observers will telephone regularly 
throughout Sunday.  Personnel from the Defense Attache Office 
and the Military Assistance and Advisory Group will be 
stationed at the JCE, at the armed forces HQ, and at Police 
HQ throughout the day. 
 
The Ambassador and Mrs. Hertell will carry out a day-long 
program of visits to polling stations, the JCE, and the 
USAID-funded NGO Participacion Ciudadana.  Canadian, Dutch 
and EU ambassadors have accepted their invitation to join 
this program. 
 
Prospects 
Passions have been high this week and candidates have 
presented themselves as larger than life (for example, at his 
May 12 closing rally President Mejia declared to followers 
that he has now moved into first place).   There have been 
charges and counter-charges among the parties about plans to 
breach the rules, commit fraud, or resort to violence or 
premature declarations.  Our expectation is that the Saturday 
\"cooling off\" day and the long Sunday voting process 
(described below) will help to cool things down.  The process 
will be well monitored by observers - - some 250 from abroad, 
6,500 from Participacion Ciudadana, and tens of thousands 
from the political parties.  Electoral officials and 
electoral police have been appropriately trained.It is our 
expectation that the JCE will announce a clear result by 
midnight. 
 
Leonel Fernandez goes into the election with a long trail of 
favorable poll numbers, the most reputable and recent of 
which credit him with around 54-59 percent of the intentions 
of the electorate.  Even so, Mejia has surged over past weeks 
to 27-30 percent, in no small part due to his open-handed 
caudillo pork-barrel approach to politics.  Opinions in the 
Embassy are divided - - if we were to make a single 
abstracted prediction, it would probably reduce to a 50-50 
chance for a second round.  Whichever way it goes, we will be 
advising the Department via e-mail on Sunday night.  Events 
on Election Day and on the Monday holiday will shape our 
decision on further immediate reporting. 
 
When Will We Know? 
 
JCE President Luis Arias has cautioned us that the wait may 
be long but that he hopes to make the first call as early as 
10 p.m.  Others are less optimistic. 
 
Regulations issued by the JCE in 1996 prohibit the 
announcement of any results or projections before the JCE 
makes its count public. The results of \"quick counts\" will be 
compiled by Participacion Ciudadana (approximately an 8 
percent sample, expected to be within 0.1 percent of the 
final result) and by the OAS (30 voting stations, expected to 
be within 1.5 percent of the final result). Each organization 
will deliver the result to the JCE in a sealed envelope. 
Political parties will make their own counts (thus, there is 
considerable tension among them over the prospect of early or 
mistaken celebrations).  The Association of Young 
Entrepreneurs (ANJE) announced its intention to do \"exit 
polling\" with the assistance of the Gallup Organization, an 
initiative that some have decried as intrusive.  ANJE says 
that it will observe the rules prohibiting early release. 
 
The wait for election returns will depend upon the number of 
irregularities and challenges and would be affected by any 
major disruption of the process.  The JCE program for 
international observers (primarily the representatives of 
other national electoral authorities) features a visit to the 
JCE at 10 p.m. with a press event at 10:30 )but this event 
may feature only commentary, without announcement of returns. 
 
 
For the Record: The Voting Process 
 
Electoral officials for each of the polling stations 
(\"colegios electorales\" or voting tables)  meet at 5:30 a.m. 
on Sunday, May 16, to be identified, registered, and sworn in 
by the presidents of the colegios.  Delegates of the 
political parties and of the civic organization 
\"Participacion Ciudadana\" present at most colegios will 
present their credentials and will be registered.  Following 
opening and inspection of the equipment and materials, polls 
will open at 6 a.m.  Voters receive numbers in the order of 
their arrival and line up, with men and women in different 
queues.  A redrawing of the voting registers last year has 
reduced the maximum number of voters per booth to 400 from 
the previous 600. 
 
A voter presents his or her national identity card (\"cedula\") 
for verification.  Both the voter roll and the cedula feature 
a photo.  The voter receives a single-sheet ballot featuring 
the parties and photos of their candidates (parties are 
further identified by their traditional colors; a number of 
minor parties are formally allied to major candidates and 
feature those photos).  The voter retires behind a cardboard 
screen to mark the ballot, then folds it in four and walks 
out to deposit it in the sealed ballot box.  Representatives 
of political parties may challenge individuals as not 
corresponding to the registered voter or for irregularities; 
in these cases, the challenged ballot is sealed and set apart 
for adjudication of the complaint. 
 
Voters whose names do not appear on the rolls are checked 
against the list of ineligible voters first; their names are 
then checked against the general roll and if appropriate they 
are directed to the correct voting place. 
 
Voting continues throughout the day.  Polls close at 6 p.m. 
and anyone in the queue at that time is allowed to vote. 
 
Polling officials and registered observers are present for 
the vote count.  Ballots are emptied onto a table.  They are 
counted and the result is compared with the count of voters 
who passed through the polling station.  Discrepancies are 
recorded; if the ballot box contains more ballots than the 
number who voted, the incident is recorded and by random 
selection a number of ballots are removed to reduce the count 
to the appropriate number.  In such a case, removed ballots 
are burned.  A voting official then opens ballots one by one, 
displaying each one to those present.  He announces the 
result, which is tallied by two other officials on separate 
displays.  After all are counted, the tallies are compared. 
If necessary, discrepancies are resolved.  Vote totals are 
written on a report form, countersigned by all present and 
then covered with transparent adhesive.  Ballots, tally 
sheets and report are sealed in a special bag and other 
materials are packed and sealed.  All are given into the 
custody of the assigned member of the Electoral Police, who 
proceeds with voting officials to the municipal board. 
 
At the municipal board the materials are received, opened and 
receipted and voting officials queue to feed the report form 
into a scanner for electronic encrypted transmission to the 
JCE,s computer center in Santo Domingo, where nationwide 
returns are tallied.  (This is a new procedure, but since the 
OAS observer team convinced the JCE to carry out several test 
runs of the scanning procedures and the computer count, the 
system is expected to perform adequately.) 
 
2.  (U) Drafted by Michael Meigs. 
 
3. (U)  This report and others in our series are available on 
our SIPNET site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/   along with 
extensive other material. 
HERTELL 
"
"16931","5/14/2004 20:26","04SANTODOMINGO2933","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 05 SANTO DOMINGO 002933 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI; USSOUTHCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/14/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION SERIES #49: LEONEL FERNANDEZ -- 
THE ONCE AND FUTURE PRESIDENT? 
 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske.  Reason:  1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
 1.  (SBU) This is cable #49 in our series on the Dominican 
presidential elections. 
 
FERNANDEZ: THE ONCE AND FUTURE PRESIDENT? 
 
(SBU) Lawyer turned politician, Leonel Fernandez once reigned 
over the small island nation of the Dominican Republic. 
Times were good - tourism and exports were up, the currency 
was stable, and the country achieved unmatched economic 
growth, up to 8 percent annually.  Fernandez owed his victory 
to unexpected support from outgoing President Joaquim 
Balaguer, but despite that twist in politics, he helped his 
small nation gain international stature, while pulling away 
from its dictatorial past toward institutionalized democracy. 
 Although this bright picture was clouded by allegations of 
corruption within his administration and a problematic, 
unpopular partial privatization of the electricity sector, 
most Dominicans recall Fernandez as the leader of prosperity 
and stability. 
 
Constitutions and Foundations 
 
(SBU) The constitutional changes negotiated following the 
flawed 1994 elections opened the way for Fernandez\'s 
candidacy by truncating Balaguer\'s term to two years, but 
they also instituted a ban on presidential re-election. 
Approaching the end of his term, Fernandez turned to private 
sector supporters to propose the establishment of a \"think 
tank\" for the Dominican Republic.  Donors responded 
generously, providing an endowment, a downtown lot, 
construction services and donations that allowed the \"Global 
Foundation for Democracy and Development\" (FUNGLODE) rapidly 
to become a busy, credible, U.S.-style institution in a 
modern four-story building with a fully furnished research 
library, auditorium, publications, a program of seminars and 
conferences, and formal links to universities (Columbia, 
Rutgers, Drexel) and institutions (the Smithsonian, Microsoft 
Corporation). Fernandez, as president, has had four years on 
international conference circuits. 
 
(U) FUNGLODE\'s mission statement could serve equally well as 
Fernandez\'s conceptual approach to government and 
campaigning; as a private, non-profit organization it is 
\"dedicated to formulating strategic and conjuncture related 
innovative proposals on relevant issues of national interest, 
enhancing the quality of the national debate, and devising 
public policies crucial to the Dominican Republic\'s good 
governance and socioeconomic development.\"  There is a close 
association between the PLD and FUNGLODE, but the foundation 
has its own identity (see www.funglode.org).  FUNGLODE 
executive director Temistocles Montas was Technical Secretary 
to the Fernandez presidency and is a senior PLD advisor to 
Fernandez;  economic director Frederic Emam-Zade served as 
Under Secretary at the Fernandez Foreign Ministry. 
 
The Rational Man 
 
(C) Fernandez is a reader and a thinker, though not 
necessarily an original or deep thinker. His conceptual style 
is that of problem solver, an approach that retains the 
historical social concern of the PLD without the anti-market 
rhetoric of Juan Bosch. In January he had FUNGLODE commission 
an economic policy diagnostic from the Economist Intelligence 
Unit; in April the PLD published a 150-page party platform 
long on concern, lofty in ambition and relatively short on 
specifics. 
 
(C) Fernandez\'s soft-spoken, cerebral style contrasts 
markedly with the brash tendencies of his leading rival, 
incumbent President Hipolito Mejia.  Mejia has leveled a 
number of personal attacks against Fernandez, emphasizing 
legal retainer payments received from the spectacularly 
corrupt Baninter. Fernandez does not deny receiving these; 
and FUNGLODE staff acknowledge that Baninter pledged the 
revenue from identified financial assets to the endowment -- 
a gift that disappeared when Baninter collapsed.  None of 
these charges has been particularly damaging, probably 
because Baninter president Ramon Baez Figueroa gave funds to 
individuals, officials, causes, and charities across the full 
political spectrum. 
 
Concerning the United States and the Region 
 
(SBU) His relations with the United States were generally 
good during his 1996-2000 term, and Fernandez has promised to 
pursue strong cooperation with the U.S. Government if elected 
to serve a second term. In mid-March 2004 a senior PLD 
delegation met with NSC and State Department staff to deliver 
an aide-memoire confirming PLD interest in good relations, 
including support for the free trade agreement then in 
negotiation, for law enforcement cooperation, and for 
anti-terrorism efforts. 
 
(C) The PLD platform advocates closer ties with other 
Caribbean nations for regional and trade issues.  As 
president, Fernandez recognized Cuba in 1998.  Fidel Castro 
later visited the Dominican Republic and Fernandez gave him a 
decoration in a state ceremony.  Fernandez\'s PRD adversaries 
seek to trade on the Cuba decision; they assert to their 
followers that Fernandez now owns a hotel in Cuba (the logic 
is lacking, but the smear is evident). Fernandez is pragmatic 
on Cuba -- when the United States was seeking to persuade 
Mejia to support the Cuba resolution at the UN Commission on 
Human Rights in April, 2004, the Ambassador sought and 
obtained Fernandez\'s assurance that he would not speak out 
against a Dominican Republic vote against Cuba.  Mejia\'s 
reluctant vote provided the margin of victory, and Fernandez 
kept his word, never mentioning the subject. 
 
(SBU) Fernandez is on good terms with President Chavez of 
Venezuela, in part because as FUNGLODE president he served as 
the mediator who traveled to Caracas to negotiate the 
engagement of the Carter Center in Venezuela\'s polarized 
politics.  U.S. authorities saw this as a positive example of 
Dominican engagement in the region. 
 
(U) The Fernandez administration revised procedures in 1998 
so as to make possible the extradition to the United States 
of Dominicans and other nationals.  Several fugitives were 
delivered under these provisions, although some extradition 
requests were denied. 
 
(C) The Ambassador is acquainted with Fernandez from the 
1996-2000 presidency and has met periodically with him in 
formal and informal settings, one-on-one and in groups.  The 
relationship has warmed considerably over time.  At the 
Ambassador\'s private lunch for Fernandez and senior aids on 
April 13, Fernandez said he would be happy to \"vet\" with the 
Embassy any prospective appointees for sensitive positions. 
He confirmed his intention to support the free trade 
agreement and to work to implement it.  At about the same 
time, he commented publicly that a Fernandez administration 
would honor Dominican commitments to the United States 
concerning support for the effort in Iraq (later, 
unfortunately, Mejia withdraw the troops). 
 
The March Back 
(SBU) The PLD\'s candidate for the presidency in 2000, Danilo 
Medina, placed a weak third, leaving the way clear for 
Fernandez to reassume control of the party.  The 
deterioration of the Dominican economy in 2002-2003, due both 
to externalities and to errors by the Mejia administration, 
made Fernandez look golden.  An easy winner in the PLD party 
selection process, Fernandez has enjoyed poll numbers near 60 
percent since October of 2003. On looming purple and yellow 
billboards across the country, his smiling face promises 
Dominican voters a \"return to progress\" if he is elected on 
May 16th. (Mejia\'s slogan in weak response in the later 
campaign has been \"Let\'s Work Together to Get to the Good 
Times.\") The numbers have diminished slightly, but reputable 
firms estimate Fernandez\'s support around 55 percent of the 
electorate. 
 
(U) With 71 percent of Dominicans believing the country is in 
worse shape now then it was when Fernandez left office in 
2000 and about the same number declaring outright rejection 
of Mejia, PLD faithful are predicting a first-round victory. 
Some observers worry that PLD members\' triumphalism now may 
lead to violence if results declared by the Central Electoral 
Board (JCE) do not immediately and obviously favor Fernandez. 
 
(C) Fernandez and senior supporters are worried about the 
possibility of fraud and concerned at the aggressive attitude 
of Mejia and his faction of the PRD. In early 2004 Fernandez 
asked publicly and privately for more extensive international 
observation of the elections.  At a lunch hosted by the 
Ambassador in April, he spent the first 20 minutes of the 
encounter on this subject.  As with FUNGLODE, he was able to 
tap the Dominican private sector -- ten donors associated 
with the National Council of Entrepreneurs (CONEP) stumped up 
a total of $100,000 and members of a U.S.-based 
Dominican-American business group matched that or better. 
These donations financed a 25-person electoral observation 
team from the International Foundation for Electoral Systems 
(IFES), to function independently of the OAS observer mission 
supported by the United States, the European Commission and 
Canada. 
 
Tough Road Ahead 
 
(SBU) If he is elected, Fernandez will be facing far greater 
difficulties than he did in 1996-2000.  The Congress in 
office until 2006 is dominated by the PRD (with an absolute 
majority in the Senate).  The IMF program is on continuing 
review until at least June, at which time the principal goals 
must be renegotiated; any Dominican government will be 
carrying out a challenging austerity program over the medium 
term.  Fernandez has told supporters they\'ll have to give him 
time to set things right, but expectations will be 
irrationally high if he is elected. 
 
(C) The PLD has traditionally been a fairly exclusionary 
party -- for example, Fernandez gave reformistas virtually no 
posts in his government, even though he owed his election in 
large part to the support of Balaguer.  Many interests would 
be clamoring for a place in his administration; among the 
first in line will be the senior reformistas who broke 
bitterly with Eduardo Estrella to support Fernandez. 
 
(C) Another question, in our opinion,is whether Fernandez 
will be tough enough.  Mejia has taken decisions, even if 
they were at times wrong decisions; as for Fernandez, it\'s 
not yet clear whether Fernandez will cut through the dialogue 
and contending interests to impose clear direction and 
discipline within his administration.  This is particularly a 
concern as regards corruption -- a major ill of Dominican 
institutions that without forceful action will continue to 
poison politics and the economy. 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Lawyer, politician, intellectual - a brief bio 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
(U) Leonel Fernandez was born in Santo Domingo on December 
26, 1953, but moved to New York City in 1956 and attended 
elementary and junior high school there.  In 1969, he 
returned to Santo Domingo for high school and college, 
eventually receiving a law degree in 1978 from the Autonomous 
University of Santo Domingo (UASD).  Fernandez has done 
postgraduate work in law at Columbia University and at the 
State University of New York.  He is the current chairman and 
president of the PLD, as well as the founder and president of 
the Global Foundation for Democracy and Development 
(FUNGLODE). 
 
(SBU) Fernandez entered politics in the early 1970s under the 
tutelage of Professor Juan Bosch, long time member of the 
Dominican Revolutionary Party (PRD).  In the mid-1970\'s he 
left the party with Bosch to establish the leftist Dominican 
Liberation Party (PLD).  During the 1980s and early 1990s, 
Fernandez was the PLD\'s press secretary, eventually becoming 
the party\'s unsuccessful vice-presidential candidate in 1994. 
Fernandez practiced law before running as PLD candidate for 
President in 1996 and winning thanks to Balaguer\'s support. 
(Balaguer\'s move was widely interpreted as against the PRD\'s 
Jose Francisco Pena Gomez rather than for Fernandez.) 
 
(C) During his presidency, Fernandez elevated the 
international presence of the Dominican Republic by making 
historic official visits to Haiti and to Europe, 
participating in international forums and summits, and 
concluding free trade agreements with CARICOM and the Central 
American nations.  His domestic record was more mixed, 
however, as strong economic growth and successful 
privatization of several unprofitable state enterprises 
coincided with an ineffective partial privatization of the 
system of regional electricity generators and distribution 
companies. For the last two years of his term he faced an 
opposition-dominated Congress. 
 
(U) Fernandez speaks native Dominican Spanish, fluent English 
and some French. 
 
(U) In 2003, Fernandez married fellow lawyer Margarita 
Cedeno, and the two have a daughter, Yolanda.  Fernandez has 
two other children, Nicole and Omar Leonel, from a previous 
marriage that ended in 1995. 
 
2.  (U) Drafted by Clare Ribando, Michael Meigs. 
 
3.  (U) This report and others in the series are available on 
the classified SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/  along with 
extensive other material. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HERTELL 
"
"16933","5/14/2004 22:04","04SANTODOMINGO2937","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 002937 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/PPC AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI; SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION #50: OBSERVERS - MUCHOS OJOS 
 
 
1. (U) This is no. 50 in our series on the Dominican 
presidential election: 
 
ELECTION OBSERVERS - MUCHOS OJOS 
 
We expect as many as 250 international observers, including 
160 associated with the OAS Electoral Observation Mission, to 
be in the Dominican Republic to monitor the presidential 
voting and computation of returns on May 16.  Some 26 foreign 
countries will be represented, including 15 OAS member 
states.  Nearly all our contacts expect and welcome the 
international presence. Opposition parties and civil society 
groups want reassurance that the process is free, fair and 
transparent; Dominican Government authorities want an 
imprimatur on their management of the electoral process to 
help convince the public to accept the results.  Some 6500 
Dominican observers organized and trained by the USAID-funded 
NGO \"Participacion Ciudadana\" (Citizens\' Participation) will 
greatly extend the reach of the electoral observation across 
the country. 
 
The international observers include the following who are 
receiving credentials from the Central Election Board (JCE): 
 
-- 39 who comprise the OAS mission, funded by Canada, the 
United States, and the European Union, led by OAS expert 
Santiago Murray and accompanied by Deputy Secretary General 
Luigi Einaudi; 
 
-- diplomatic volunteers from local embassies and missions, 
including about 50 from the Embassy, who have received JCE 
and OAS credentials and will assist the OAS mission; 
 
-- 25 who comprise a mission of the International Foundation 
for Election Systems (IFES), funded by the private sector 
here and in the United States and led by former Colombian 
president Andres Pastrana; 
 
-- some 32 NGO representatives from 7 or 8 countries, 
including 5 Lima Accord countries, organized by the National 
Democratic Institute (NDI), financed partly by the OAS and 
partly by NDI; 
 
-- 3 from the Carter Center, financed by the OAS and 
integrated into the OAS mission; 
 
-- 36 members of electoral tribunals and commissions from 
countries of the Tikal Protocol and similar regional 
agreements and CAPEL (secretariat of the Tikal Protocol), 
sponsored by their governments and the JCE; and 
 
-- diplomats from locally accredited embassies and missions 
(up to 2 from each mission, including from this Embassy the 
Ambassador and DCM); and 
 
-- delegates from member parties of the Socialist 
International and possibly others in the region. 
 
The OAS mission is providing the main thrust of the 
international observer effort and will coordinate with the 
other observer entities.  The OAS has deployed field 
coordinators nationwide in ll regions including the capital; 
the coordinators will supervise other OAS observers and the 
diplomatic volunteers.  OAS experts on electoral data 
processing, logistics, and legal matters will cover relevant 
units at JCE headquarters and elsewhere as needed.  A core 
OAS group, which arrived May 3, will remain until May 21 or 
as long as necessary to ensure that all serious challenges or 
disputes have been resolved.  The OAS has briefed the 
diplomatic volunteers on observation procedures and 
guidelines.  The volunteers will visit polling stations 
(colegios electorales) in the morning (starting at 6:00 a.m.) 
and late afternoon (before the 6:00 p.m. closing), observe 
the counting of ballots at a station, accompany the transfer 
of the voting tally sheets (actas) to municipal election 
boards, and observe the scanning of the tallies into the 
JCE\'s computer network.  Some of the volunteers will gather 
samples for the OAS\'s planned \"quick count\" estimate of the 
returns, which will be communicated to the JCE prior to its 
announcement of official results. 
 
\"Participacion Ciudadana\" (PC), providing domestic observers 
for the fifth election since 1996, will deploy approximately 
6500 trained Dominican personnel on May 16, organized in 165 
regional and local observer teams linked to a five-person 
operations center.  They will operate independently, but in 
coordination with, the international observers, and will 
produce a \"quick count\" using a different methodology from 
the OAS -- more time-consuming, but with a narrower margin of 
error.  PC\'s permanent staff since last year has monitored 
election preparations, campaigners\' behavior, and political 
advertising, issued detailed weekly bulletins about 
developments, and advocated substantive discourse by the 
candidates.  PC has also assisted the JCE with recruitment 
and training of qualified poll workers.  After the election, 
PC will assess the reliability of the computer processing of 
the vote count and the overall election process and take 
appropriate action with regard to any post-election 
difficulties. 
 
The observers from U.S.-based NGOs (IFES, NDI, and Carter 
Center) will operate with varying degrees of autonomy.  The 
IFES mission will operate independently in Santo Domingo and 
the provinces, in consultation with the OAS to avoid 
unnecessary duplication, and will concentrate on technical 
aspects of the election.  The NDI group of NGO reps will 
accompany \"Participation Ciudadana\" to learn how to organize 
and conduct domestic election observation, for the purpose of 
organizing similar efforts in their home countries.  The 
Carter Center representatives will be integrated into the OAS 
observer mission.  The Carter Center \"mediator\" as needed is 
Arturo Valenzuela, who helped negotiate the agreement that 
ended a crisis during the 1994 Dominican elections and 
resulted in a truncated two-year term for former president 
Joaquin Balaguer.  Valenzuela arrives on Sunday, so he will 
meet with candidates and other players on election day. 
Shelley McConnell, senior associate director of the Carter 
Center, will accomnpany OAS Deputy SYG Einaudi, and historian 
Jonathan Hartlyn, a prominent expert on the Dominican 
Republic, will complete the center\'s contingent. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Bainbridge Cowell. 
 
3. (U) This report and others in our election series can be 
read on the SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ index.cfm along 
with extensive other current material. 
HERTELL 
"
"17037","5/18/2004 23:27","04SANTODOMINGO2968","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SANTODOMINGO2933","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 002968 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/PPC AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI; SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION #51: LEONEL SWEEPS THE ELECTION 
 
REF: A. (A) SANTO DOMINGO 2933 (NOTAL) 
 
     B. (B) SANTO DOMINGO 2525 
     C. (C) SANTO DOMINGO 2294 
     D. (D) SANTO DOMINGO 2722 
 
1. This is no. 51 in our series on the Dominican presidential 
election: 
 
ELECTION RETURNS: LEONEL SWEEPS THE ELECTION 
 
Leonel Fernandez Reyna, former president (1996-2000) and PLD 
candidate in the May 16 election, won a sweeping electoral 
victory May 16 and is scheduled to be inaugurated August 16 
as President for another four-year term, along with Vice 
President-elect Rafael Alburquerque.  In a final result 
consistent with pre-election polls, with all 12,203 precincts 
reporting, Fernandez and Alburquerque obtained 57.11 percent 
(2,063,871 votes); runner-up President Hipolito Mejia (PRD) 
33.65 percent (1,215,928); Eduardo Estrella 8.65 percent 
(312,493); and minor candidates 0.59 percent (21,408). 
Turnout, as in previous Dominican elections, was high -- 
3,613,700 voters, nearly 73 percent of the 5,020,703 on the 
rolls.  The PLD ticket won in 29 of the country\'s 32 
provinces. 
 
The election proceeded normally and calmly in most places, 
but according to the local press violent incidents left three 
persons dead and 11 injured.  These incidents  added to a 
previous toll of deaths and injuries during the campaign. 
(Septel reports further on behavior and atmosphere during the 
election.) 
 
Timely Concession by Mejia 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
President Mejia publicly conceded the outcome shortly after 
11:00 p.m. on election night, five hours after the polls 
closed.  The Central Electoral Board (JCE) had as of that 
time released a single report, based on returns from only 2.8 
percent of the polling stations. The major political parties 
had computed their own preliminary results, taken from 
reports of their poll watchers. Election observers of the OAS 
and \"Participacion Ciudadana\" (PC) made \"quick count\" 
estimates of the returns, and one polling firm conducted an 
exit poll. A Penn Shoen exit poll was given to international 
media at around 9 p.m.  All tallies Fernandez and 
Alburquerque winning on the first round, with the following 
percentages: OAS,  58.25 percent; PC, 56.57 percent; and exit 
poll, 56.8 percent. 
 
Favorable Reactions, Criticisms 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
International observers, including those provided by the OAS, 
International Foundation for Election Systems (IFES), and 
Lima Accord (who came in conjuntion with the National 
Democratic Institute - NDI), commented positively to the 
press about the organization and conduct of the election. 
Former president of Colombia Andres Pastrana, who headed the 
IFES mission, congratulated the Dominican people for having 
carried out a clean, transparent voting process with high 
participation.  They and other observers also commended Mejia 
for promptly recognizing Fernandez as the winner, setting a 
democratic example and forestalling any unrest.  OAS mission 
chief Santiago Murray criticized bureaucratic procedures for 
having slowed collection and announcement of returns, and 
promised to deliver written recommendations for improvements. 
 Lima Accord representatives called for controls on 
candidates\' media use and campaign financing. 
 
Priorities for New Administration 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
President-elect Fernandez, who during the campaign had 
criticized the rise in foreign debt in President Mejia\'s term 
(2000-2004), told the press May 17 that he planned to comply 
with the Dominican Republic\'s international financial 
obligations, including honoring sovereign bonds.  He said he 
expected to stabilize the peso-dollar exchange rate to lower 
domestic consumer prices.  Fernandez proposed a \"government 
of national unity\" and expressed a desire for good relations 
between the PLD and the ruling PRD, soon to be in the 
opposition.  His mandate from the voters, he said, would be 
\"to confront the economic and social crisis that affects the 
country.\"  Fernandez promised to appoint a transition team to 
work with the current authorities during the three-month 
transition. 
 
Fernandez\'s Background and Platform 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
We review Fernandez\'s background in Ref A.  Of all the 
candidates, he made the most detailed proposals for economic 
recovery -- in speeches (Ref B), in a 150-page PLD platform 
(Ref C), and in a think tank study on the economic \"model\" to 
follow (Ref D).  The proposals generally emphasized economic 
stability and incentives for private business development. 
The PLD platform also called for strengthening of the rule of 
law and the nation\'s political, administrative, and judicial 
institutions. 
 
 
2. Drafted by Bainbridge Cowell. 
 
3. This report and others in our election series can be read 
on the SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ index.cfm along 
with extensive other current material. 
HERTELL 
"
"17116","5/20/2004 12:02","04SANTODOMINGO3004","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 003004 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/PPC AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI; SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/19/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN PRESIDENT-ELECT LOOKS FORWARD TO CLOSE 
RELATIONS WITH U.S. 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Hans Hertell. Reason: 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (SBU)  Summary.  Dominican President-elect Leonel 
Fernandez assured the Ambassador on May 19 that he 
anticipated close and collaborative relations with the United 
States.  Economic issues will occupy much of his time. 
Dominican relations with Cuba are a relatively low priority 
for him. Fernandez will discourage Venezuela\'s Hugo Chavez 
from using anti-U.S. rhetoric.  He will have \"zero tolerance\" 
for corruption and narcotics trafficking.  In his second term 
he will have a better understanding of what the United States 
has to offer. Fernandez asked whether the USG could provide 
expert advice on \"governability.\"  End summary. 
 
2. (SBU)  On May 19 President-elect Leonel Fernandez received 
the Ambassador, DCM and EcoPol counselor at his offices at 
the Foundation for Global Development (FUNGLODE). Fernandez 
was friendly and appeared rested and relaxed. The meeting 
lasted for more than an hour (despite the crowd of party 
members, officials, and press waiting in the foundation and 
outside).  Fernandez thanked the Ambassador for helping 
assure the presence of a large number of international 
observers for the May 16 election.  He said that without 
their presence and vigilance, the governing PRD of President 
Mejia would have been able to use fraud and intimidation to 
push the elections into a second round. 
 
3. (C)  The Ambassador expressed USG satisfaction at the 
conduct of the elections and at the positive role played by 
observers.  He described events leading up to the emotional 
press comments in mid-evening of Msgr. Agripino Nunez, head 
of the Elections Monitoring Committee (\"Comision de 
Seguimiento\")(septel).  Fernandez commented that by evoking 
the three-month election stalemate of 1978, Nunez had helped 
forestall PRD meddling in the results of the first round. 
 
4. (C)  The Ambassador noted for Fernandez the concern of the 
USG about the possible evolution of Dominican relations with 
Cuba and with Venezuela.  He left Fernandez a copy of the 
executive summary of the recent Commission for Assistance to 
a Free Cuba. Fernandez commented that his energies would be 
devoted immediately to economic issues, in the hopes that a 
bad 2004 could be followed by a better 2005.  Relations with 
Cuba would be far down his list of priorities. \"I understand 
your sensitivities about Cuba. The United States is the most 
important partner of the Dominican Republic.\"  As for 
Venezuela, he said he needs to engage Chavez because pursuant 
to the San Jose accords, Venezuela supplies almost all of the 
fuel for power plants in the Dominican Republic.  He hopes to 
secure the continuation or improvement of terms for purchase 
of Venezuelan petroleum. Fernandez commented that he would be 
suggesting to Venezuelan President Chavez that he refrain 
from anti-U.S. rhetoric. \"He owes me one,\" smiled Fernandez, 
referring to his own mediation between Chavez and the Carter 
Center in early 2002. 
 
5. (C) Fernandez said that he would have \"zero tolerance\" for 
corruption and for any involvement with narcotics 
trafficking.  During his practice as a criminal lawyer, he 
said, he never accepted any clients accused of narcotics 
offenses.  He confirmed his interest in receiving briefings 
on law enforcement cooperation and appeared receptive to the 
Ambassador\'s offer to vet with U.S. databases the names of 
prospective nominees for sensitive positions.  Fernandez said 
that his administration would work closely on law enforcement 
matters with the USG.  He mentioned his concern about lax 
controls in airports and ports, and the Ambassador outlined 
for him the current DHS \"90-day letter\" notification to the 
Dominican authorities of the requirement to raise security 
standards at Las Americas Airport in Santo Domingo 
 
6. (C) He has no plans to travel to Washington, but he will 
go to the New York area during the summer to accept an 
honorary doctorate at the Stephens Institute of Technology. 
He expects to meet economist Jeffrey Sachs and hopes to call 
on New York mayor Michael Bloomberg. 
 
Economics and Governability 
 
7. (SBU) Fernandez stressed his interest in working with the 
econ staff of the Embassy and checked to see that the Embassy 
had received a copy of the report commissioned from the 
Economist Intelligence Unit.  The most pressing priority for 
him, he said, is taking action to reduce the quasi-fiscal 
deficit constituted as certificates of deposit at the Central 
Bank.  His advisors are suggesting early action to sell state 
assets so as to pay down the amount of debt outstanding. 
Fernandez mentioned assets acquired in the Baninter 
liquidation process but otherwise was not specific.  He 
believes that reducing the short-term debt burden will 
increase confidence and help increase the value of the peso 
in exchange markets with positive effects on prices. He made 
no specific comments about the IMF program or sovereign debt 
issues. 
 
8. (SBU) Fernandez spoke of plans to reinforce the \"brand\" of 
the Dominican Republic by organizing international broadcasts 
of baseball and cultural events (an idea drawn from the EIU 
study).  \"It will be fun, being president.\"  He commented 
that in his second term he will have a much clearer idea of 
the possiblities of U.S. cooperation and support.  He wants 
to work closely with U.S. governors of states with 
significant Dominican populations (New York, New Jersey, 
Florida and Illinois) and with other large U.S. states 
(California and Texas). 
 
9. (U)  The President-elect mentioned a USAID-financed study 
on issues of \"governability\" done for President Sanchez 
Lozada of Bolivia by Dr. Eduardo Gamara of Florida 
International University.  Considering the delicate state of 
politics and the economy, he is very interested in finding 
out whether he can obtain USG technical assistance for a 
similar study. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
Taking Mejia\'s measure 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
10. (C)  Fernandez considers that despite his intelligence, 
President Meja is simply not a conceptual thinker. Mejia\'s 
intuitive, energetic populist character makes him vulnerable 
to  clever manipulators about him, such as economic advisor 
Andres Dauhajre, Junior. (In contrast, Fernandez has great 
respect for Mejia\'s Technical Secretary Carlos Despradel.) 
Fernandez believes that PRD manipulators were on their way to 
disrupting the vote count, a scheme that Mejia forestalled by 
conceding the election at 11:40 when only 2.8 percent of 
polling stations had succeeded in notifying results to the 
Central Elections Board (JCE). 
11. (C) He said he was surprised by Mejia\'s public comment 
yesterday that Mejia would not attend the May 28 regional 
summit in Monterrey and the suggestion that Fernandez or a 
Fernandez representative represent the Dominican Republic. 
Mejia is president for three more months, Fernandez stressed, 
and Mejia needs to fulfill his responsibilities. Fernandez 
takes the report as a sign that Mejia is worn down after the 
months of energetic campaigning. 
 
12. (C)  Fernandez emphasized that he has no intention of 
instituting legal action against Mejia.  \"In the United 
States there is great respect for the institution of the 
Presidency,\" he commented, \"and this recent history in Latin 
America of prosecuting presidents as soon as they leave 
office is wrong and undignified.\"  He expects to work with 
Mejia\'s officials toward a smooth transition.  Fernandez did 
not mention any further arrangments in this regard. 
 
13. (U)  In closing, Fernandez accepted the Ambassador\'s 
offer to host meetings between the incoming administration 
team and senior staff of the Embassy.  He again stressed the 
importance in his eyes of relations with the United States, 
recalling his previous remark that Dominican relations are 
based on key geographical points: Puerto Rico, Miami, New 
York, and Madrid. 
 
 
HERTELL 
"
"17197","5/24/2004 10:39","04SANTODOMINGO3056","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO2968","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 003056 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAN 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WJ 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI; USSOUTHCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION SERIES #52: DEMOCRACY WINS 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 2968 
 
1.  (SBU) Following is number 52 in our series on the 
Dominican presidential election: 
 
Democracy Wins 
- - - - - - - - 
 
Voting was calm and orderly across the Dominican Republic 
during the 12-hour polling period on May 16, in what many 
consider to have been the best-conducted vote in national 
history.  In the evening, scattered worrisome incidents 
suggested that the counting phase might become troubled. 
With the benefit of hindsight, the brief but strong evening 
remarks on national television by Msgr. Agripino Nunez, head 
of the civil society Elections Monitoring, Commission, who 
was flanked by several ambassadors (including the U.S. 
Ambassador) and the OAS representatives, are viewed as a 
defining moment.  President Mejia conceded the election early 
in the vote count, at 11:40 p.m., and Dominicans everywhere 
awoke the next day knowing who had won.  The elections are 
widely viewed by Dominicans as a success and a source of 
pride.  Many Dominicans have told us that the USG role was 
positive and crucial. 
 
Here are the details: 
 
During the day of voting, Dominican election officials, party 
coordinators, and electors cooperated effectively across the 
country.  In contrast to the heated campaign, May 16 was 
characterized by massive, orderly voter turnout and a 
relatively smooth, albeit slow, electoral process. 
 
Election day officially began at 6 a.m. as more than 12,000 
voting tables opened across the 32 provinces of the Dominican 
Republic and in 11 foreign cities with large expatriate 
Dominican populations.  Observers reported some initial 
disorganization and, in isolated cases, late openings due in 
part to incomplete election materials.  Most voting sites 
were relatively organized. International observers, including 
50 volunteers from the U.S. Embassy community, found 
Dominicans engaged in the process, animated, and generally 
cordial to one another. 
 
An early morning altercation between PLD and PRD party 
loyalists outside a polling station in Barahona, a 
southwestern province, provoked an exchange of gunshots that 
left three persons -- criminals with personal conflicts among 
themselves -- dead. The incident was the worst stain on the 
democratic process.  The Central Electoral Board (JCE), in 
accordance with law, suspended news programs on several 
government-run television channels for blatantly biased 
(pro-Mejia) reporting.  Later in the day, there were 
unconfirmed reports of isolated confrontations. 
 
Dominicans welcomed the presence of some 270 international 
observers led by the OAS and IFES delegations, and more than 
6500 national observers from Dominican NGO Participacion 
Ciudadana.  There were few problems with voter rolls and 
virtually no attempts to bring campaigning or campaign 
material into voting areas. Many sites reported average 
turnouts of 60 percent by mid-day and more than 70 percent 
when the polls closed at 6 p.m. 
 
First-hand experience matches press reports 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
In addition to fielding 50 observers who became accredited to 
the OAS Mission, Ambassador Hertell led a bus tour of polling 
and other election sites during the day.  He was accompanied 
by the ambassadors in the Dominican Republic from the 
European Community, Canada, and Spain, and by two IFES 
observers (Colombian ex-President Pastrana and Judy Black). 
The DCM also led a U.S. \"information central\" from which we 
took reports from the OAS-assigned observers, officers posted 
at certain critical locations, and newscasts.  The 
Ambassador,s party was briefed regularly during the day and 
evening, and shown copies of the \"information central,s\" log 
of developments.  All in all, the ambassadors saw first-hand 
in Santo Domingo the display of orderly daytime voting that 
the \"information central\" was hearing about nationwide. 
Ambassador Hertell shared his positive reaction with the 
press. 
 
Tension rose in the evening 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
After the polls closed, tensions rose. 
 
In a few locales, domestic or international observers were 
excluded from the vote count. 
 
In addition, although procedures stipulated that each voting 
station\'s election officials and party delegates were to fill 
out and sign each vote-count tabulation (\"acta\"), this did 
not always happen. At a number of polling places, especially 
at those in Santo Domingo and Santiago, PRD party delegates 
refused to sign vote tally sheets carrying the manifest bad 
news of a PRD defeat. 
 
Moreover, poor organization, and possibly resistance, at the 
134 municipal election boards (\"juntas municipales\") caused 
bottlenecks as election officials sought to deliver and 
register the sealed bags containing the paper ballots and 
\"actas.\"  At \"juntas municipales\" election officials 
discovered many irregularities in documentation and referred 
tally sheets to adjudication.  Few of the \"actas\" were being 
scanned and transmitted to the JCE.  By mid-evening, lines up 
to three blocks long were visible at \"juntas municipales\" in 
the capital and elsewhere.  Delays were accompanied by 
increasing rumors of fraud by government officials.  Tempers 
were rising. 
 
Finally, embassy volunteers and other observers reported a 
handful of mostly unconfirmed reports of intimidation or 
confrontation. We heard, for example, that PRD campaign 
official Guido Gomez Mazara, formerly legal adviser to Mejia, 
was reported to have entered a voting station accompanied by 
armed guards who intimidated the persons inside. 
 
Civic action and reaction 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
As irregularities were reported, head of the civil society 
Elections Monitoring Commission (\"Comision de Seguimiento\") 
Monsignor Agripino Nunez Collado, fearing the worst, called 
insistently to persuade the Ambassador and several other 
ambassadors to call on JCE President Luis Arias at 9 p.m. to 
raise their concerns.  The Ambassador, armed with the 
\"information central,s\" news, agreed.  He mobilized the 
other ambassadors, who met with Nunez and JCE Judge Luis 
Arias at the JCE.  Arias was aware of the most serious 
incidents and said they had been handled by election 
officials and the electoral police. 
 
As the group went out to attend a previously scheduled OAS 
press conference at the JCE, 
Nunez surprised those present by taking the microphone. 
Flanked on camera by the U.S., EU, Canadian, and Spanish 
ambassadors and by the OAS, he delivered an impromptu 
impassioned appeal -- live, on camera -- for the President\'s 
supporters to respect the people,s will as expressed in the 
election results.  He said, in part: 
 
\" . . .The President said, in his last appearance, that 
whoever wins, wins; that\'s the President\'s word.  And I would 
invite all of those who are, gentlemen, supporters of the 
President to respect that affirmation by the President.  Let 
no one think about trying to stand in the way of the process. 
 Remember what happened in 1978 when the administration of 
that time tried to avoid acknowledging popular will, (and 
remember) the response of the people and of the international 
community.  That\'s why I wanted to come here, pro-actively. 
I would not wish either for the people to go through bitter 
times or for the international community to have to make 
reproaches to sectors of our society. 
 
\"This country has embraced democracy.  And nothing and no one 
will be able to obstruct this process. . . .  Let no one even 
imagine staining this process. . . .  Let God enlighten all 
Dominicans.  Let no one think of perverse ideas, may they 
respect as a sacred thing this civic day\'s work given by the 
Dominican public to the politicians, to the observers, to the 
national media and to the foreign press that is here to bear 
witness.  May God help us and illuminate and give strength to 
all who have the responsibility of protecting the ballot 
boxes in the various polling stations until they can provide 
their results to the JCE, which standing above all criticism 
has given us an example of patriotism!\" 
 
Nunez\'s vehemence and his reference to the 1978 three-month 
election deadlock between then-President Balaguer (PRSC) and 
President-elect Antonio Guzman (PRD) stirred passions rather 
than calming them. They completely overshadowed the measured, 
positive statements subsequently made by OAS Deputy Secretary 
General Luigi Einaudi and by IFES delegation head (and former 
Colombian president) Andres Pastrana, both of whom praised 
the election process. 
 
President Mejia is reported to have been furious at Monsignor 
Agripino\'s appeal.  Mejia had already told the Ambassador by 
telephone earlier in the evening that he would \"do the right 
thing\" if there were no change in the trend of the earliest 
returns (52 percent PLD to 38 percent PRD). 
 
At 9:30 p.m., a Penn, Shoen & Berland exit poll with 56 
percent for Fernandez was leaked to CNN, but not carried in 
local media.  Simultaneously, PLD numbers sent out by e-mail 
to party sympathizers showed the same trend.  The JCE issued 
its first bulletin at 10:40, based on a mere 2.8 percent of 
the 12,000 polling stations, showing Fernandez with 54 
percent.  The Ambassador spoke briefly with President Mejia 
by telephone about that time; Mejia again emphasized his 
intention to do the right thing and abide by the will of the 
people.  At 11:40, before the JCE was able to publish any 
further preliminary results, Mejia went before television 
cameras to acknowledge Fernandez\'s victory and to offer his 
congratulations. 
 
Mejia\'s action has no precedent in Dominican politics.  It is 
widely believed to have facilitated the rest of the vote 
count and prevented violence and intrusion into the electoral 
process.  His declaration immediately cut the growing 
late-night tension.  It stopped diehard PRD members from 
their efforts, planned or spontaneous, to draw out the 
already long and painful process.  By acknowledging defeat, 
Hipolito Mejia offered an 
unexpected and illuminating example of democratic fair play, 
both to his own party and to the rest of those watching. In 
the following days, our Dominican contacts, almost without 
exception, fairly glowed with pride about the successful 
conduct of the national presidential elections. 
 
The U.S. Government in general, and the U.S. Ambassador in 
particular, have received constant praise in the past week 
from our Dominican contacts and the Dominican public and 
press, first for supporting -- both rhetorically and 
financially -- free and fair elections and international 
observers for them; second, for indicating our support of the 
winner of the election, whichever candidate won; and finally, 
for our own visible monitoring of the election process, 
which, we are told, was both calming and a visible reminder 
that the international community would not tolerate 
illegitimate leaders.  The OAS mission also praised the USG 
effort on behalf of free and fair Dominican elections as a 
model that works. 
 
2.  (U)  Drafted by Michael Meigs, Clare Ribando, and Lisa 
Kubiske. 
 
3.  (U) This report and others in our elections series are 
available on the 
SIPRNET at http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo.  
HERTELL 
"
"17434","6/2/2004 15:01","04SANTODOMINGO3197","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE9195","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 003197 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INL/RM - Diane Sanvido 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR 
SUBJECT: FLASH REPORT FOR THE MONTH OF MAY 2004 
 
REF: STATE 09195 
 
The cumulative allotment and obligations for FY2004 
as of the end of MAY, 2004 is provided: 
 
Project    Project            Cumulative   Cumulative 
Number     Title              Allotment    Obligations 
0116-2101  PD&S 1911X1022.2   110000.00     0 
0116-2101  PD&S 1911461022.2  182033.00    165499.72 
HERTELL 
"
"17527","6/4/2004 18:41","04SANTODOMINGO3297","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE121718","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 003297 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, NEA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/04/2014 
TAGS: PREL, IZ, DR 
SUBJECT: IRAQ: SUPPORTING THE IIG - DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
RESPONSE 
 
REF: STATE 121718 
 
Classified By: Economic and Political Counselor Michael Meigs for Reaso 
n 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Embassy delivered reftel points June 4 to MFA 
international organizations deputy 
director Rhadys Abreu de Polanco.  Poloff emphasized the 
importance of the Dominican 
Republic, as a member of the Coalition, expressing firm 
support for the new Iraqi authorities 
publicly and in international organizations and meetings. 
She has passed our request 
to Under Secretary for Political Affairs Miguel Pichardo 
(number two in the MFA), and 
anticipates a positive response.  We will follow up and 
report any significant details 
that the MFA provides. 
HERTELL 
"
"17531","6/4/2004 19:55","04SANTODOMINGO3312","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE78697","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 SANTO DOMINGO 003312 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE TO EB/IFD/OIA/ATBRYAN AND L/CID/JNICOL 
STATE ALSO TO WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) 
STATE PASS TO TREASURY FOR LLAMONICA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, ECON, KIDE, EINV 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: 2004 INVESTMENT DISPUTES AND 
EXPROPRIATION CLAIMS REPORT 
 
REF: SECSTATE 78697 
 
1. This cable provides the 2004 Investment Disputes and 
Expropriation Claims Report for the Dominican Republic per 
reftel. 
 
2. The United States Government is presently aware of 13 
claims of U.S. persons that may be outstanding against the 
Government of the Dominican Republic (GODR), down from 22 
claims a year ago.  Though there has been a considerable 
effort to resolve the many cases that have languished for 
years, the recently negotiated Free Trade Agreement with the 
United States has made the resolution of outstanding disputes 
a priority for the GODR.  A USAID-sponsored consultant has 
been working with the GODR to develop a system for evaluating 
and resolving claims through the use of bonds.  In 1999, Law 
104-99 was passed, offering the opportunity for claimants 
whose disputes arose on or before August 16, 1996, to 
circumvent the traditional method of claim resolution (at the 
\"Bienes Nacional\"), and seek compensation from a specially 
appointed Commission, provided the claimants are willing to 
accept payment in bonds.  Recent legislation has made the 
Commission a permanent fixture of the Ministry of Finance and 
has opened the opportunity for claimants with cases 
post-August 16, 1996, who filed their claims prior to the 
August 16 cut-off, to bring their cases before the 
Commission.  The Embassy raises these expropriation and 
investor dispute cases with the GODR on a regular basis, and 
all information provided herein was last updated in May 2004. 
 
1. a) Claimant A 
 
    b)      1999 
 
    c)      Eight independent power producers (IPPs), six of 
which are U.S.-owned, provide approximately 30 percent of the 
Dominican Republic\'s electricity.  In 1999, the IPPs entered 
into a \"Definitive Agreement\" with the GODR under which an 
escrow account would be established in order to permit the 
capitalization of the State electricity company,s 
(Corporacion Dominicana de Electricidad (CDE)) power 
generation and distribution facilities.  This escrow account 
would receive payments from the new distribution companies 
that would be used to pay the IPPs for both current invoices 
and accumulated arrears.  The GODR did not live up to its 
commitment to implement this escrow arrangement; CDE failed 
to keep its payments current to the IPPs; and the GODR 
breached several agreements to make up the shortfall, which 
exceeded $100 million dollars. 
 
In September 2002, the GODR announced that seven of the eight 
IPP\'s had agreed in principle to give up their existing 
long-term contracts.  To date, the GODR has successfully 
renegotiated only one new contract with these IPP\'s.  In 
February 2004, the GODR and CDE signed a short-term agreement 
with two of the Claimants whereby the GODR agreed to increase 
tariff rates, make payments on current invoices and negotiate 
accumulated arrears.  Although tariff rates were increased 
CDE and the GODR have continuously failed to make timely 
payments to Claimants A, resulting in cash flow problems and 
credit difficulties, and they are presently in default to 
Claimants A, and other generating companies in the sector, in 
excess of $400 million dollars.  Of additional concern, the 
contracts with Claimants A are backed, in part, by 
guarantees.  Should Claimants A\'s lenders call those 
guarantees, the GODR faces liability of more than $425 
million dollars.  The Embassy has made repeated approaches to 
high government officials in an effort to resolve this 
ongoing problem. 
 
2. a) Claimant B 
 
    b)      1998 
 
    c)      Claimant B purchased land located on the access 
road to Santo Domingo\'s Las Americas Airport.  In 1998, the 
Public Works Department built the ramp for a highway overpass 
on Claimant B,s land.  Embassy contacted Public Works on 
behalf of Claimant B and was informed that Claimant B will be 
included in whatever settlement (i.e., cash payment or 
relocation) was to be offered to Dominican landowners 
affected by this construction. The GODR has yet to authorize 
funding to settle Claimant B,s claim, and it fell too late 
to be included in the original bond issuance program.  A 
possible GODR initial settlement offer will likely be in the 
form of bonds.  No time has been set for a decision. 
 
3. a) Claimant C 
 
    b)      1994 and various 
 
    c)      In 1996, Claimant C discovered that various 
components of the GODR had, over time, built facilities 
(including an airport runway extension) on a parcel of land 
near the town of Barahona that Claimant C\'s company had owned 
since the 1920s.  The Embassy raised this case on numerous 
occasions with senior Dominican officials and facilitated 
meetings between Claimant C and the GODR.  In 1999, Claimant 
C accepted an offer of settlement in partial payment of the 
claim of approximately $1.5 million dollars, which the GODR 
paid in three equal payments.  Efforts by Claimant to recoup 
the remainder of its claim have been rebuffed by the GODR, 
which takes the position that the claim has been satisfied in 
full.  The matter is presently in litigation. 
 
4. a) Claimant D 
 
    b)      1994 
 
    c)      Claimant D performed construction and asphalt 
paving services for the Dominican Department of Public Works 
at the Maria Montez International Airport, as well as other 
asphalt paving services in other locations in Barahona 
Province.  At the time the work was completed (1996), the 
Dominican Department of Public Works owed Claimant D 
approximately $2 million dollars. 
 
The Embassy facilitated meetings between Claimant D and the 
Secretariats of Public Works and Finance in December 1998. 
 
SIPDIS 
At that time, Claimant was informed that the GODR was 
considering the issuance of bonds to cover such public-works 
debts.  Claimant D was not satisfied with this response and 
initiated legal action against the GODR in the U.S. District 
Court for Puerto Rico; however the action was dismissed for 
lack of standing in July 2000.  In January 2000, Claimant D 
applied for bonds under Law No. 104-99, which was designed to 
liquidate a variety of claims inherited from previous 
governments.  In July 2000, Claimant D was awarded government 
bonds equal to about $1 million dollars.  According to 
representatives of the GODR, the claim has been fully 
satisfied.  This case has been concluded. 
 
5. a) Claimant E 
 
    b)      1992 
 
    c)      Claimant E owned land bordering the road to the 
Santo Domingo airport, which was expropriated by the GODR in 
1992 for highway expansion.  The Embassy repeatedly contacted 
GODR officials urging resolution of this case.  On January 
31, 2003, the case was settled with bonds provided under Law 
No. 104-99, with claimant receiving 2,051,724 pesos in bonds 
at today\'s rate of exchange the equivalent of just over 
$45,593.  In January 2004, Claimant E notified the Embassy 
that the GODR had been eight months behind on its scheduled 
payments.  According to Claimant E, the GODR had also been 
paying every six months instead of every three months as 
agreed in the settlement.  The Embassy requested the GODR to 
look into the matter and payments have resumed.  This case 
has been concluded. 
 
6. a) Claimant F 
 
    b)      1992 
 
    c)      In 1992, Claimants F purchased 20,000 square 
meters of land near Santo Domingo, valued at $40,000.  Six 
months after Claimants F occupied the land and planted crops, 
the GODR\'s Agrarian Institute (IAD) cut down the fence and 
permitted Dominican peasants to occupy the land. 
 
Claimants F reported they held legal title to the land, and 
provided the Embassy with copies of documents supporting 
their claim.  The IAD maintained that since the original 
owner was prevented by Dominican law from selling this parcel 
of \"agrarian reform land,\" their land seizure was legal. 
According to Claimants F, IAD officials have admitted that 
they made a mistake when they cut the fences and permitted 
the occupation of the land. 
 
The Embassy raised this case repeatedly with IAD and GODR 
officials, and as a result, police removed some squatters 
from the property.  Others remained however, and continue to 
occupy part of the property.  In January 2000, Claimants F 
applied for bonds under Law No. 104-99, and received a 
settlement from the Commission for 3 million pesos ($66,670). 
 This case has been concluded. 
 
7. a) Claimant G 
 
    b)      1991 
 
    c)      In 1988, the GODR asked Claimant G to build 1,000 
homes for sugar cane workers.  Claimant G never signed a 
contract with the GODR.  Materials were shipped to the 
Dominican Republic for the first phase of construction (30 
homes) and Claimant G had invoices showing that the materials 
arrived.  In 1989, Claimant G was informed that, due to heavy 
rains and a bad crop, construction of the homes would be 
delayed.  Claimant G arranged with port authorities to have 
the materials remain in the port until construction could 
begin.  In 1991, Claimant G discovered that all of the 
materials had disappeared.  Claimant G alleged that some of 
the materials were auctioned off, and some given to GODR 
entities.  Claimant G estimates losses at $1.3 million. 
Claimant G,s case was disqualified under Law No. 104-99. 
Claimant G has since initiated legal action in a Dominican 
court. 
 
8. a) Claimant H 
 
    b)      1991 
 
    c)      In 1991, the GODR\'s Agrarian Institute (IAD) 
expropriated approximately seven hectares of land in 
Esperanza belonging to Claimant H\'s mother. Claimant H 
claimed to have obtained several Dominican court orders 
requiring the peasant squatters who occupied the land to 
leave, but these orders were not enforced. 
 
In September 1997, the IAD made a settlement offer, which 
Claimant H refused.  Claimant H requested Embassy assistance 
in negotiating a better offer from the GODR, which in 
Claimant H\'s view, should include not only payment for the 
land, but also payment for lost economic use of the land. 
The Embassy repeatedly explained to Claimant that it could 
not negotiate on behalf of U.S. claimants.  The IAD 
maintained that, having forwarded its offer of compensation 
to higher authorities, it had no further role to play.  In 
January 2000, Claimant H applied for bonds under Law No. 
104-99. 
 
In January 2003, the GODR\'s bond Commission concluded their 
evaluation of Claimant H\'s case, and offered a settlement of 
413,160 pesos or roughly $9,181 dollars.  Claimant H refused 
this offer and was seeking approximately ten times this 
amount.  Dominican officials advised Claimant H to withdraw 
his claim from consideration under the Ministry of Finance\'s 
bond program, and pursue it through the \"Bienes Nacionales,\" 
the organization normally charged with the resolution of 
expropriation cases.  Embassy has been advised that a 
settlement in Claimant H,s matter has been reached but that 
payments have not begun.  This case has been concluded. 
 
9. a) Claimant I 
 
    b)      1990 
 
    c)      In 1989, Claimant I purchased a 75 percent 
interest in beachfront property near Barahona.  Claimant I\'s 
Dominican partners owned the remaining 25 percent.  Claimant 
I\'s interest in the land had an estimated value of $112,000. 
 
On September 18, 1989, the GODR seized the land, stating that 
it intended to use it for the construction of a power plant. 
Following this action, Claimant I entered into a new 
agreement with its Dominican partners, under which Claimant I 
would cease payments on the land and would reduce its 
interest in the property to 15 percent.  It was agreed, 
\"legal actions would be undertaken jointly, the proceeds of 
which would be distributed between the co-owners in the same 
proportion as their interest in the property.\" 
 
Claimant I and its Dominican partners have sought 
compensation in Dominican courts, and reported to the Embassy 
in 1994 that the courts had ruled in their favor.  No 
compensation was received so in January 2000, Claimant I 
applied for bonds under Law No. 104-99.  The Embassy was 
advised in 2003 that the GODR was reevaluating the matter. 
No time has been set for a decision. 
 
10. a)      Claimant J 
 
      b)    1990 
 
      c)    In 1989, Claimant J, and a number of U.S. and 
Dominican partners, signed a 20-year lease with the GODR\'s 
State Sugar Council for the use of some 200 acres of farmland 
at a site known as La Esperanza in the Northwestern Dominican 
Republic.  Claimant J claimed to have started significantly 
improving the land when, in 1990, the GODR took control and 
turned it over to peasant squatters.  Claimant J sought 
compensation from the GODR for damages suffered as a result 
of that seizure. 
 
In July 1992, the government of President Balaguer reportedly 
accepted Claimant J\'s claim of 4.1 million pesos (then 
$303,000).  Claimant J received approximately 2 million pesos 
as part of this settlement offer from the GODR, but continued 
to seek payment for the outstanding 2.1 million pesos 
(presently approximately  $44,450).  The Embassy repeatedly 
raised this case with senior GODR officials, and in April 
2003, the GODR awarded Claimant J bonds to cover the 
outstanding $2.1 million peso debt balance, redeemable in 
2005.  This case has been concluded. 
 
11. a)      Claimant K 
 
      b)    1983 
 
      c)    Claimant K is the owner of land with an assessed 
value of approximately $1 million in the Puerto Plata area of 
the Dominican Republic.  In 1983, the GODR seized the land, 
which is now part of the \"Isabel de Torres Scientific 
Preserve.\"  Claimant K sought compensation, but none was 
approved. 
 
According to Claimant K, the GODR previously valued the land 
at $330,000.  Claimant K reported that it has an assessment 
valuing the land at approximately $990,000. 
Claimant K is willing to negotiate.  The Embassy raised this 
matter in all discussions of investment disputes with the 
GODR.  To date there has been no resolution, and the matter 
continues to experience payment opposition on behalf of 
Claimant K. 
 
 
12. a)      Claimant L 
 
      b)    1972 
 
      c)    Claimant L\'s family invested in land just east of 
Santo Domingo with the intent of building a hotel.  The GODR 
seized the land to help create what is today a public park. 
Claimant L had documents verifying the GODR debt to the 
family.  Embassy is not aware of any official estimate of 
value, but has been advised that a settlement has been 
reached and payment received.  This case has been concluded. 
 
13. a)      Claimant M 
 
      b)    1980\'s 
 
      c)    The GODR expropriated Claimant M\'s property in 
the 1980\'s, which Claimant M valued at several million 
dollars.  The Embassy continues to include the matter in all 
discussions of investment disputes with the GODR.  To date 
there has been no resolution. 
 
14. a)      Claimant N 
 
      b)    1986 
 
      c)    Pursuant to a presidential decree in 1986, the 
GODR expropriated 823,495.70 square meters of land belonging 
to Claimant N for use in the construction of the 
Maria Montez Airport in Barahona.  Claimant N has sought 
compensation for the land, improvements to the land, crops 
located thereon, and for three million cubic meters of raw 
materials extracted from the land.  The claim was brought to 
the attention of the Embassy in May 2001, and has been 
included in all discussion of investment disputes with the 
GODR since that time.  To date there has been no resolution. 
The matter continues to be considered for settlement. 
 
15. a)      Claimant O 
 
      b)    1998 
 
      c)    Claimant\'s land was expropriated in 1998 to 
permit highway expansion on the road from Santo Domingo to 
Bavaro.  The matter was initially presented to the Commission 
for possible resolution with bonds, however the Commission 
lacked the legal authority to offer settlement, as the 
expropriation occurred after August 16, 1996.  Claimant O 
requested the case be withdrawn from consideration without 
prejudice.  The initial settlement offer was for 15,540,000 
pesos (approximately $345,333.) 
 
16. a)      Claimant P 
 
      b)    1994 
 
      c)    Government expropriation occurred in Moncion by 
INDRHI (\"Instituto Nacional de Recursos Hydroelectricos\") for 
purposes of dam construction.  Parties initially resolved the 
dispute by contract, agreeing to compensation in the amount 
of 1,053,971 pesos.  GODR assigned this matter to INDRHI for 
resolution and that agency has handled all payments to date. 
This case has been concluded. 
 
17. a)      Claimant Q 
 
      b)    1992 
 
      c)    Claimant Q\'s land was expropriated in Santo 
Domingo to permit highway expansion.  Claimant Q signed a 
settlement contract with the GODR in 1999, but was not paid. 
Claimant received bonds for payment in 2003 in the amount of 
141,840 pesos (approximately $3,152.) and the case has been 
concluded. 
 
18. a)      Claimant R 
 
      b)    1971 
 
      c)    Claimant R sold land in Santo Domingo to the GODR 
in 1971.  Terms of the contract provided for partial payment 
at the time of sale, and final payment shortly thereafter. 
Claimant R received the initial payment, but never the final 
payment.  The outstanding amount is 22,696 pesos 
(approximately $504).  Claimant is not interested in bonds, 
and has requested removal from consideration by the 
Commission.  Embassy has been advised that payment has been 
approved but not yet disbursed.  This case has been concluded. 
 
19. a)      Claimant S 
 
      b)    1998 
 
      c)    Claimant S signed a contract with the GODR in 
1999 to receive compensation for expropriated property.  The 
contract was silent regarding specific terms or timing of 
payments, and Claimant S was never paid.  The total amount 
owed to Claimant S was 948,087 pesos (approximately $21,070). 
 Embassy has been advised that payment has been made.  This 
case has been concluded. 
 
20. a)      Claimant T 
 
      b)    1998 
 
      c)    Claimant T\'s land was expropriated in 1998 for 
highway expansion in Santo Domingo.  The claim is for 
15,342,840 pesos (approximately $340,950), but as it arose 
after August 16, 1996, Claimant T was not eligible for the 
bond program under Law 104-99. 
 
21. a)      Claimant U 
 
      b)    1987 
 
      c)    Claimant U\'s contract claim involves the unpaid 
commission for loan guarantees on a real estate transaction 
brokered in 1976.  Claimant U asserts he is entitled to 2% of 
12 million dollars, the loan guarantee amount.   Claimant has 
a default judgment from the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 
Ninth Circuit, entered in 1987, for $240,000.  Claimant U 
asserts that with interest, the claim is now valued at 
approximately two million dollars.  Embassy has raised this 
issue with GODR officials and facilitated a meeting between 
Claimant U and GODR officials, and the parties are presently 
in discussion. 
 
22. a)      Claimant V 
 
      b)    1995 and various 
 
      c)    Claim involves non-payment for the major repair 
of a power plant located in Haina, which began in March 1993. 
 After a number of delays, the unit was operational in April 
1994, and final invoices from 1995 indicate $1,956,858, and 
8,878,485 pesos owed for goods and services rendered.  At a 
1997 meeting between the parties, Claimant V asserted that 
the GODR acknowledged interest on the debt of 8,380,624 pesos. 
 
Embassy repeatedly contacted GODR officials in regard to this 
claim.  On April 30, 2003, Claimant V was presented with a 
settlement check, for cash, in the amount of 19,250,000 pesos 
(approximately $427,780).  GODR officials have stated that 
the money represents final settlement of Claimant V\'s claim. 
This case has been concluded. 
 
23. a)      Claimant W (NEW) 
 
    b)      2003 
 
    c)      In 1998 Claimant W and family responded to 
advertisements by the Dominican Republic seeking U.S. 
investment by purchasing two adjacent parcels of land located 
in Cumayasa, San Pedro de Marcoris.  In March of 2003 
Claimant W, while visiting his property, discovered that 
almost 700 mature coconut trees had been bulldozed and other 
property destroyed by the Dominican Consejo Estatal de Azucar 
(CEA).  When Claimant W contacted the CEA office in Santo 
Domingo to request an immediate evacuation of the area a CEA 
engineer recommended that Claimant W instead request that the 
properties be replaced with other unspecified parcels in 
unspecified areas, citing the CEA had incurred expenses in 
grading the land and uprooting the fruit trees. 
 
Claimant W immediately contacted a local attorney and 
initiated legal action in a Dominican Court.  The Embassy 
contacted GODR officials in regard to this claim.  The matter 
is currently pending a judicial decision. 
 
24. a)      Claimant X (NEW) 
 
    b)      1992 
 
    c)      In 1991 as an insurer to an international company 
with a contract to provide the sale of power station spare 
parts for the Dominican Corporacion Dominicana de 
Electricidad (CDE), Claimant X paid approximately 
$2,829,112.63 to the insured and accepted transfer of all 
rights to settlement in the dispute with the Dominican 
government.  On May 12, 1992 an Italian court ruled in favor 
of Claimant X and ordered the payment of approximately 
$5,369,781 (original sum plus accrued interest and expenses) 
by the CDE/GODR.  In early 2003, GODR officials sought to 
retain a law firm in the United States to negotiate a final 
settlement with Claimant X.  The retainer was never 
completed.  On May 27, the Ministry of Finance,s Legal 
Department issued its opinion on the issue and it is expected 
that negotiations will begin on a final settlement within the 
next few months. 
 
The Embassy had been in repeated contact with GODR officials 
in regard to this claim and brought it to the specific 
attention of the Ministry of Finance at every available 
opportunity.  Claimant X will continue to engage GODR 
officials through their local attorney.  The estimated amount 
owed by the GODR is now approximately $10 million. 
 
 
3. The list of claimant names follows, all of whom are 
believed to be either U.S. citizens or companies with 
significant U.S. citizen investment.  No privacy act waivers 
have been signed by these claimants. 
 
Claimant A:       Smith-Enron CLP, AES Dominican Power 
Partners, 
Coastal Corporation, Seaboard Corporation, 
Maxon Engineering Services Inc., and Cogentrix Corporation 
Claimant B:       Boyd Hernandez Collazo 
Claimant C:       Hunt Marckwald, Habanero Land Company 
Claimant D:       Betteroads Asphalt 
Claimant E:       Carlos Langa 
Claimant F:       Daniel and Lorrie Taveras 
Claimant G:       Warner Chilcott 
Claimant H:       Juan Dominguez 
Claimant I:       Ronald Blisset, Blisset Enterprises 
Claimant J:       Craig Frederickson 
Claimant K:       Luis M. Bordas and Neyda Lopez Bordas 
Claimant L:       Andrew Abdo and Family 
Claimant M:       Mercedes Colwin 
Claimant N:       Miguel Angel Fuentes Vasallo 
Claimant O:       Immobilaria ANATOLE, S.A. 
Claimant P:       Successors of Martin Gomez 
Claimant Q:       Silvio Eusebio Diaz Infante 
Claimant R:       Successors of Ricardo Molinari Diaz 
Claimant S:       Sergio M. Francisco 
Claimant T:       Matia de los Angeles Barcelo Salas 
Claimant U:       Charles V. Meadows 
Claimant V:             Besco Inc. 
Claimant W:       Dante Llacuna 
Claimant X:       New Hampshire Insurance Company 
HERTELL 
"
"17537","6/6/2004 3:38","04SANTODOMINGO3313","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 05 SANTO DOMINGO 003313 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/OMA; 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB; USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD;TREASURY FOR 
OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/04/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN TRANSITION #1: TAKING REPONSIBILITY FOR 
THE MESS 
 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske.  Reason:  1.4 (a) and (d). 
 
1.  (SBU) Following is number 1 in our series on the 
Dominican presidential transition: 
 
Taking the Responsibility for the Mess 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
(SBU) Both sides of this transition are apprehensive of 
taking blame for the pain necessarily associated with the IMF 
requirement to deliver a tax reform proposal to Congress by 
July.  President Mejia has told the press he will deliver to 
legislators any draft text that has been fully discussed with 
everyone interested. Leonel Fernandez,s transition team told 
the Ambassador that they fully realize the urgency of the 
task and they expect Mejia to take the responsibility. 
Complicating all this is the revelation that the 2004 budget 
was driven 50 percent over planned expenditures by off-budget 
financing of construction and development projects. Fixing 
things with the IMF will be a huge job. 
 
Meeting of the Transition Teams 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
(U) Dominican media of May 31 carried photos from a press 
appearance of the two teams appointed to coordinate the 
transition between the May 16 presidential election and the 
August 16 inauguration.  Leading for the Mejia government was 
Mejia,s running mate Rafael \"Fello\" Subervi, with Finance 
Minister Rafael Calderon, Intellectual Property Director 
Orlando Jorge Mera and former Agriculture Minister, campaign 
manager Eligio Jaquez.  For Fernandez were PLD political 
strategist (former presidential candidate) Danilo Medina and 
PLD technical coordinator Temistocles Montas, with former 
Finance Minister Daniel Toribio, PRSC notable Carlos Morales 
Troncoso (sugar baron, former Vice President and former 
ambassador to Washington) and representatives from three 
minor parties supporting Fernandez: Pascual Prota (Fuerza 
National Progresista), Jose Francisco Pea Guaba (Bloque 
Institucional Social-democrata), former Lome Convention 
coordinator Max Puig (Alianza por la Democracia) and Jose 
Gonzalez Espinosa (Partido de los Trabajadores Dominicanos). 
 
(U) Every individual in the photo is a politician deeply 
invested in his respective camp.  All the PRD representatives 
are senior office holders; all the PLD representatives are 
either members of the PLD Political Committee or heads of 
allied parties. 
 
IMF, Tax Reform and Finances 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
(SBU) Among the most important issues on the table between 
the two transition teams is a highly charged technical issue: 
the requirement in the IMF program that the government 
deliver to Congress by the end of July a draft proposal for 
tax reform.  Both sides are leaning as far back from this 
issue as possible, well aware that to be credible, any reform 
will mean raising tax collections, cutting spending or ending 
subsidies or some combination of the three.  Short of the 
generally shunned solution of abandoning efforts to revise 
the badly faltering IMF program, there is no way to avoid the 
pain of decision. 
 
(SBU) And the financial situation is about to get worse. 
Temporary taxes on 5 percent exports and special exchange 
levies of 10 percent on imports are set to expire this month, 
although such temporary measures in the past have sometimes 
continued indefinitely.  The government continues to roll up 
debts for unpaid electricity subsidies and without a revised 
standby approved by the IMF board it has no further access to 
international lending to keep the electricity sector 
furnished with fuel.  We expect that by mid-June the sector 
will be again into the sporadic widespread blackouts that 
characterized the end of 2003. 
 
(U) Workers are beginning to press for early salary 
adjustments.  The minimum wage is down 25 percent in real 
terms since last August and labor leaders are advocating a 60 
percent across-the-board wage hike.  Public sector physicians 
are insisting on a 100 percent wage hike.  Air traffic 
controllers got nothing but a lock-out just before Easter. 
Government workers received a grossly inadequate 9 percent 
increase in December, 2003, a year of 40 percent inflation, 
and nothing since. 
 
PLD and the Embassy 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
(SBU) The Ambassador hosted the full PLD transition team on 
June 1 for a review of the issues of greatest importance to 
the United States.  Opening the meeting, team members 
complained that PRD counterparts had provided nothing on the 
tax reform issue, despite the stipulation by the IMF that the 
package was to be prepared between January and March.   The 
incoming administration was well aware of the need to 
preserve the IMF standby, they said, and without early 
cooperation by incumbents, it might be impossible to deliver 
a package to the PRD-dominated Congress before the end of 
2004. 
 
(U) The Ambassador told them that Dominicans were justifiably 
proud about the conduct of the 2004 elections, and that the 
political parties should strive to make this presidential 
transition process the best in Dominican history.  That would 
require close consultation and cooperation between the 
administrations, a process that the Embassy stands ready to 
assist. 
 
(SBU) Over the course of the luncheon the Ambassador outlined 
ongoing programs and bilateral concerns: 
 
- - The world has changed since Fernandez,s 1996-2000 
administration. The United States places the highest priority 
on measures against terrorism and corruption, regional 
security and law enforcement cooperation. 
 
- - The bilateral agenda for long-term development needs to 
focus on education at all levels, institution building 
(especially in the judiciary), the investment climate, and 
public health concerns. 
 
 - Items requiring urgent attention in advance of the August 
16 inauguration are the IMF and tax reform, airport and port 
security, an approach to energy sector problems, the status 
of Dominican consulates in the United States, trafficking 
issues and trade,  especially the Free Trade Agreement (FTA). 
 
 
(C) The Ambassador advised the team of the 90-day letter on 
Santo Domingo,s &Las Americas8 Airport from Homeland 
Security Secretary Ridge (delivered April 28) and informed 
them of the U.S. requirement to close unregistered Dominican 
consulates in the United States. 
 
(C) The PLD transition team was attentive and appeared to be 
in general agreement with the Ambassador on these priorities. 
 One notable and somewhat embarrassing exception came from 
Carlos Morales Troncoso, who sought to justify the current 
effort of Dominican sugar interests to re-open the text of 
the free trade agreement (in order to block any imports, of 
high fructose corn syrup, even on graduated 15-year terms). 
The Ambassador and senior staff told Morales that the FTA was 
a carefully balanced package and not open to revision.  None 
of the other PLD team members made a comment. 
 
(U) Medina and Montas as team leaders agreed to remain in 
close contact with senior Embassy officials as they elaborate 
the PLD set of working groups and sub-commissions over the 
next two weeks. 
 
PRD and the Ugly Reality awaiting the IMF 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
(SBU) That same afternoon the DCM and EcoPol counselor called 
on Mejia,s Technical Secretary Carlos Despradel, the 
official with primary responsibility for the IMF program and 
international financial matters.  Despradel lost no time in 
laying out a financial situation far worse than he had 
earlier anticipated. 
 
(C) According to his estimates and charts prepared for the 
IMF representatives arriving the next day (June 2), the 
Dominican government had come close to targets in its 
management of the central government budget.  The government 
expenditures programmed for January-March had been 24.6m 
pesos, with revenues programmed to provide a significant 
surplus to contribute toward the non-fiscal deficit.  In 
fact, revenue had been 4.5m higher than expected and 
expenditure 3.6m more than expected.  These were the trends 
that Despradel had been reporting with a sense of 
satisfaction to President Mejia.  Mejia, he said, had 
insisted and was continuing to insist that the government 
respect the IMF standby program. 
 
(C) Completely overwhelming these achievements was the 
accumulation of untracked expenditures for sectoral projects 
financed by bilateral or commercial lending or by new 
liabilities to the government-owned Banco de Reservas. 
Despradel hired specialists last year, principally from the 
Central Bank, in order to collect and centralize information 
on these activities, and the news was dismal.  They had 
uncovered extensive activity in 2003 and 2004 never advised 
to Despradel, his staff or the IMF  ) totaling approximately 
1.5 pct of GDP.  With these expenses rolled in, the 
January-March programmed expenditures of 24.6 billion pesos 
reached 37.75m, an over-expenditure of 13.1b (53.4 percent). 
In formal terms these undeclared expenditures and debts 
constituted misinformation and a failure to cooperate with 
the IMF; Despradel was downcast about this but expressed the 
hope that Fund officials would accept his good faith efforts 
to document the situation. 
 
(C) Despradel commented that foreign export credit agencies 
and foreign commercial banks involved in development projects 
were able to exert a great deal of pressure through the 
benefiting Dominican agencies, Despradel commented, and there 
had been no formal mechanism by which he could control this 
activity.  He had refused in most cases to authorize 
acceptance of these loans, most of which were at 
near-commercial rates; officials had turned to Finance 
Minister Rafael Calderon, who had signed them with little 
hesitation.  The off-budget bilateral loans amounted to 4b 
pesos. 
 
(C) In similar fashion but subject to even less control, the 
government-owned Banco de Reservas had guaranteed letters of 
credit requested by various government officials (primarily, 
Despradel implied, for imports for infrastructure projects). 
These letters were drawn up without clearance from central 
authorities; as payment came due, the guarantees were 
executed and became government liabilities to the Banco de 
Reservas.  These off-budget liabilities totaled 3b pesos. 
 
(C) Almost all of the remaining unprogrammed expenditure was 
financed by off-budget emergency loans from the 
Inter-American Development Bank and the World Bank (largely 
for fuel for the electricity sector) amounting to 2.5b pesos. 
 Here there was no problem of misinformation; the IMF was 
aware of these loans and did not object to them. 
 
 (SBU) Despradel said that President Mejia was not aware of 
the extent of these uncontrolled off-budget expenditures.  On 
May 20 Mejia instructed government ministries to suspend 
provisionally all expenditures for projects with foreign 
financing and he withdrew from Congressional consideration 
all previously submitted contracts for foreign-financed 
projects.  Despradel traveled to Washington to inform Fund 
officials and was there at about the same time that the PLD 
team was visiting.  Despite speculation in the Dominican 
press, the Fund did not conduct any joint meeting with 
outgoing and incoming Dominican administrations. 
 
Consult and Cooperate or Face the Consequences 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
(SBU) A lack of trust between the two transition teams is 
unsurprising.  Four years of bitter rivalry have been stirred 
to a high heat by six months of campaigning.  Many allege 
that the outgoing Fernandez administration deliberately 
delayed necessary fuel price hikes in 2000, leaving the dirty 
work to Mejia.  (Fernandez,s team has a different story and 
set of justifications.) 
 
(SBU) Mejia,s administration commissioned studies of tax 
reform from economic advisors Fundacion Economia y Desarrollo 
(Andy Dauhajre, Jr.) but the results, if any, had not been 
given to Despradel, who would have consulted the Fund with 
them.  Mejia,s public comment is that he stands ready to 
submit to Congress any proposal that has been widely 
discussed and agreed.  (The private sector, represented most 
vigorously by the entrepreneurs, association CONEP, has a 
firm grip on the political parties in any matters concerning 
commercial interests and taxation.)  At the same time, the 
incoming Fernandez team does not want to share the blame for 
the almost inevitable pain of an increase in the value-added 
tax, the broadening of its application, or the cutting of 
subsidies.  As the Dominicans say, \"No one wants to inherit 
someone else,s dead bodies.\" 
 
(SBU) A decision must be made, however, and if the rival 
teams refuse to cooperate with the IMF and with one another 
on financial stabilization, they will share the blame of 
perpetuating misery - - and of postponing the chances of 
recovery until some far future, perhaps even beyond the 
Fernandez administration.  The Ambassador and Embassy are 
stepping into the gap between the mutally distrustful 
political parties, emphasizing the need to set the national 
interest above partisan advantage. 
2.  (U) Drafted by Michael Meigs . 
 
3. (U)  This report and other reporting series are available 
on our SIPNET site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/   along with 
extensive other material. 
HERTELL 
"
"17627","6/8/2004 17:02","04SANTODOMINGO3357","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 003357 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR OES, WHA/CAR; DEPT PASS ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
AGENCY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: BASEL CONVENTION NOTIFICATION 
OF SHIPMENT TO UNITED STATES 
 
 
 1.  Embassy Santo Domingo received on June 7 a diplomatic 
note transmitting a may 25 letter from the Dominican Ministry 
of the Environment advising of the transboundary movement of 
a total of 1924 kg of liquid and solid latex for incineration 
by the firm Perma Fix Environmental Services of Orlando, 
Florida (contact: Patricia Malloy, tel 407-859-4441). 
Shipments are intended to take place quarterly.  The note 
includes a duly signed and stamped original of a Basel 
Convention notification form, numbers E-000012 and E-000013, 
dated May 13, 2004, specifying Navieras B&R (Crowley Line 
Services) as the transporter. 
 
2.  Request that EPA or Dept advise whether the Basel 
Convention forms and attachments should be faxed or forwarded. 
HERTELL 
"
"17628","6/8/2004 17:09","04SANTODOMINGO3358","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04SANTODOMINGO2968","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 003358 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/PPC AND DRL;NSC FOR SHANNON AND 
MADISON;LABOR FOR ILAB;TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI; SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/07/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN TRANSITION #2: POLITICAL PARTIES RE-GROUP 
 
REF: A. (A) SANTO DOMINGO 2968 
 
     B. (B) SANTO DOMINGO 3056 
     C. (C) SANTO DOMINGO 3313 
 
Classified By: Economic and Political Counselor Michael Meigs for Reaso 
n 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (SBU) This is no. 2 in our series on the transition to a 
new administration 
in the Dominican Republic. 
 
POLITICAL PARTIES RE-GROUP 
 
(SBU) Following Leonel Fernandez\'s sweep of the May 16 
presidential election, the three major political parties are 
grappling with their futures -- the winning PLD to maintain 
party unity and ensure \"governability\" with an 
opposition-controlled Congress, and the losing PRD and PRSC 
to restructure, forge an effective opposition, and organize 
for better performance in the 2006 legislative and municipal 
elections.  The era of the strongmen is past, and the losers 
will have to try to learn democracy in-house. PRSC strongman 
Joaquin Balaguer died in 2002 and PRD statesman Jose 
Francisco Pena Gomez in 1998, and a strict interpretation of 
the Constitution might bar President Mejia from trying again. 
 
 
PLD - In the catbird seat 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
(SBU) Leonel Fernandez\'s Dominican Liberation Party (PLD) is 
united in anticipation of returning to power on August 16. 
Rivalries among the party\'s political leaders subsided over 
the past year as victory looked more and more certain. 
Undaunted by his own loss in 2000, Danilo Medina served as 
Leonel\'s campaign strategist and now co-chairs the transition 
team.  Medina strongly influences the party machinery. 
Former Vice President (1996-2000) Jaime David Fernandez 
Mirabal stayed in the shadows for most of the campaign, but 
belatedly supported Leonel\'s candidacy.  Fernandez Mirabal 
has presidential aspirations and a significant following. 
The President-elect will need to distribute cabinet and other 
posts with an eye to keeping both of these players in his 
court, while also keeping sweet the non-PLD figures who 
backed him, notably former VP (1986-1994) Carlos Morales 
Troncoso, former chief executive (1963-65) Donald Reid 
Cabral, and former PRD president Hatuey De Camps. 
 
(SBU) The PLD executive will have to work until at least 2006 
with an opposition-dominated Congress. Of 32 senators, the 
PLD has only one (the well-regarded Jose Tomas Perez) while 
the PRD has 29 and the PRSC has 2.  In the 150-member lower 
house, the PLD with 42 deputies is better situated, but must 
contend with a PRD plurality of 73 and a substantial PRSC 
bloc of 35.  The PLD will have to build coalitions to pass 
urgently needed but politically unpalatable measures such as 
the tax reform bill promised to the IMF.  Doing so will put a 
premium on centrist policies, wide consultation, and 
transparent procedures in Congress. 
 
PRD - Mejia still in control 
- - - - -- - - - - - - - - - 
 
(C) President Mejia\'s PRD, victorious in the 1998, 2000, and 
2002 elections, is disappointed about its defeat.  Despite 
its astonishing mismanagement of the economy and the budget, 
it still managed to score a third of the vote.  Mejia remains 
its preeminent personality; the PRD claims the most 
grass-roots members of any party, and a majority of them 
apparently voted for Mejia.  He and his circle, the PPH 
(Proyecto Presidencial Hipolito), controlled 70-80 percent of 
the party machine going into the election.  The electoral 
defeat may have weakened his hold, but potential challengers 
in the PRD are weaker still.  He has promised to one of them, 
Vice President and Secretary of Education Milagros 
Ortiz-Bosch, the chair of a PRD convention in November to 
restructure the party and select new leaders.  Likely to go 
is the aging interim PRD president, former Director of 
Customs Vicente Sanchez Baret. 
(SBU) An overhaul is long overdue; for the past 20 years the 
structure has been directed from the top down, first by Pena 
Gomez and then by Mejia.  The nominating process from 
November to January was confused not only by rivalries but 
also by undertainty over the actual composition of the 
long-dormant PRD national executive committee.  Competing 
candidates held committee meetings with widely different 
lists of participants. 
 
(C) Last year Ortiz-Bosch had a large following in and 
outside the PRD and a reputation for principled behavior. 
She lost her place in line because of her on-again, off-again 
stance toward Mejia\'s re-election and her half-hearted, tardy 
endorsement.  By contrast, early rival former Secretary of 
Tourism Rafael \"Fello\" Subervi recognized the inevitability 
of Mejia and served as a strong, loud vice-presidential 
candidate.  With newly burnished party credentials, he has 
resurrected his presidential aspirations - - but Fello\'s 
sleazy reputation will hinder him in any future presidential 
race. 
 
(SBU) The telegenic Hatuey De Camps, removed as party 
president in February for his stubborn and voluble opposition 
to the President\'s re-election, endorsed Leonel Fernandez\'s 
candidacy.  He has never accepted his January removal as 
secretary of the \"partido blanco,\" and his followers have 
 
SIPDIS 
camped out in the PRD party headquarters building since then. 
 In the week after the May 16 election, Hatuey had himself 
filmed by a press mob as he visited Pena Gomez\'s grave -- 
dressed in a white suit, carrying a white bouquet, with tears 
in his eyes and a catch in his voice. 
 
(SBU) A PRD national plenary May 23, attended by 1824 
delegates of a list of 2240, expelled De Camps and four other 
dissidents (including Congresswoman Felipa \"Terremoto\" Gomez, 
who had led the occupation of the party HQ). The vote was 
accompanied by a lengthy pandemonium in the hall, most of it 
directed against Hatuey with cries of \"out with the traitor!\" 
 Defiant, on June 5 Hatuey told the press that the PPH-led 
plenary could not remove him \"by law or by force\" and that 
his followers would continue to deny access to  the party 
headquarters. The PRD leadership is asking the courts to 
evict them.  De Camps will challenge Mejia for control of the 
PRD -- probably fruitlessly -- and then may found his own 
minor party and chip out a 5 percent or so share of the PRD 
base. 
 
(U) Mejia has made it clear that he intends to stay deeply 
involved in PRD politics.  He dismissed the notion bruited by 
some that he would get into the Senate via an arrangement 
with a resigning incumbent PRD senator. 
 
(SBU) The irony of Mejia\'s re-election attempt is that under 
the terms of the very Constitutional amendment that allowed 
him to run for re-election, he may now be barred from ever 
running again. According to the relevant provision of Article 
49, \"The President of the Republic may seek a second, single 
consecutive constitutional term, not being allowed afterwards 
ever to seek the same office or that of the Vice Presidency 
of the Republic.\"  By undercutting Mejia\'s electoral future 
(absent creative interpretation by the Supreme Court or yet 
another constitutional amendment), this situation reduces 
Mejia\'s hold on long-term leadership in the party to force of 
personality and coherence of concept.  The first he has; the 
second he does not. 
 
(U) A further irony: because of the 2002 amendment Leonel 
Fernandez, who already served four years as president, will 
have the option of seeking re-election in 2008. 
 
PRSC - Life after Balaguer 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
(SBU) For the PRSC, the issue is not restructuring but 
survival.  In its fifth successive electoral defeat, the 
party saw its share of the vote slip to an all-time low. Many 
Reformistas followed the lead of former Vice President 
(1994-96) Jacinto Peynado and Morales Troncoso and defected 
to non-PRSC candidates.  Peynado is seriously, perhaps 
terminally ill, undergoing medical treatment in Miami. 
Morales Troncoso has come out of semi-retirement 
ostentatiously to accompany the PLD transition team. 
Defeated presidential candidate Estrella seems an unlikely 
reformer. 
 
(C) One thing is virtually certain: party president Rafael 
Bello Andino, a relic from the \"palace circle\" of former 
President Balaguer\'s last years, will be replaced for 
resisting calls for change from the Reformista rank and file. 
 
(C) The PRSC central executive directorate reviewed reform 
proposals on June 3 and scheduled a national party assembly 
for July 24 to \"renew\" the party and its officials. 
Estrella, his senior campaign adviser Victor Gomez Berges, 
and Federico \"Quique\" Antun Batlle -- an influential PRSC 
chief who gave late support to Estrella\'s presidential bid -- 
are possibles to replace Bello Andino.  Antun Batlle has told 
us the convention could begin the party\'s \"revival or 
burial.\" 
 
(U)The party\'s long-term decline began in 1996, when Balaguer 
refused to support the Reformista candidate for president and 
instead backed the PLD\'s Fernandez in the second round; 
Fernandez once in office left the Reformistas out in the 
cold.  The aged Balaguer again abandoned his party in 2000 
and threw his support to Mejia (PRD). 
 
(C) To revive the party\'s fortunes, new leaders will need to 
exorcise not only Balaguer\'s ghost, but also his legacy of 
authoritarian, personalistic manipulation.  Antun Batlle has 
threatened privately to quit the party if it does not adopt 
more competitive, participatory internal procedures; he would 
then found a new movement designed to attract younger 
Dominicans. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Bainbridge Cowell, Michael Meigs. 
 
3. (U) This report and others in our election and transition 
series can be read on the SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ index.cfm along 
with extensive other current material. 
HERTELL 
"
"17686","6/9/2004 22:05","04SANTODOMINGO3422","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE126919","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 003422 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, IO/UNP, AND DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC, SOCI, KWMN, DR 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE, ECLAC CONFERENCE ON WOMEN, DELIVERED TO 
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
 
REF: STATE 126919 
 
1. Embassy delivered reftel talking points as a non-paper to 
MFA deputy director of international organizations Rhadys 
Abreu de Polanco, with a request that they be shared with the 
Dominican delegation to the Ninth Regional Conference on 
Women in Latin America and the Caribbean, in Mexico City June 
10-12.  There was no immediate response. 
HERTELL 
"
"17764","6/14/2004 11:06","04SANTODOMINGO3424","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 003424 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR, DRL; DEPT PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP, BTIO, DR, ELAB, ETRD, EINV, HA 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN GRUPO M SHUTTING DOWN MANUFACTURING 
OPERATION IN HAITI 
 
 
1.  SUMMARY.  Dominican apparel company, GRUPO M, is close to 
shutting down their apparel plant in Ouanaminthe, Haiti due 
to \"Workers\' Struggle,\" a group of activist employees who 
have made the plant inefficient and ineffective.  GRUPO M 
President, Fernando Capellan, stated that the company plans 
to let go 200 employees this Friday, June 11, with another 
500 on Monday, June 14.  A total shut down of the plant could 
occur shortly thereafter.  Capellan says that GRUPO M had 
received no assistance from either Haitian or Dominican 
authorities on the matter and that the company would be 
willing to reopen its operations if it gets the appropriate 
support.  END SUMMARY. 
 
2.  In the fall of 2003, in a move that was hailed by many as 
a catalyst for more integration between the Dominican 
Republic and Haiti, Dominican apparel company GRUPO M began 
operations in the Haitian town of Ouanaminthe, which is 
located directly across the border from the Dominican town of 
Dajabon (a major trading area).  Less than one year later, on 
June 9, local dailies have reported that GRUPO M is 
relocating their operation from Ouanaminthe in order to 
ensure the safety of its employees and comply with its 
contractual obligations.   GRUPO M President Fernando 
Capellan says the main reason for the shutdown is the 
pressure the company has been receiving from a group of 
activists within the plant who call themselves \"Batay 
Ouvriye\" (\"Workers\' Struggle\").  The group, led by a Ms. 
Yanneck Etienne, has been harranging other employees and 
making claims of worker exploitation over the last few 
months.  Attempts by GRUPO M to discuss issues of concern 
with Ms. Etienne have been unsuccessful, Capellan said. 
 
3.  Capellan stated that the group has made normal plant 
operations impossible.  As an example, Capellan explained, in 
February the plant assembled 30,000 pants with 400 employees 
but that last month the plant managed to only assemble 15,000 
pants with 700 employees.  The plant currently has 1,000 
employees.  As things stand, the company expects to lay off 
200 workers and move out some sewing machines and textile 
equipment by Friday, June 11 with another 500 workers to go 
on Monday, June 14.  The remaining employees will be phased 
out over the next few days until a total shutdown is achieved. 
 
4.  Capellan complained that the company had received no 
assistance on the matter from either Haitian or Dominican 
authorities.  Since these activities have taken place on 
Haitian soil, the Embassy has been unable to assess the 
situation directly.  Capellan indicates that he would be 
willing to reopen the apparel plant if working conditions 
improve, but the current situation is untenable. 
 
5.  COMMENT.  GRUPO M\'s decision is a potential set back for 
trade and investment between the Dominican Republic and 
Haiti.  The move also suggests that the cross-border 
subcontracting strategy may not be a viable approach for 
GRUPO M and other Dominican apparel companies seeking to 
improve competitiveness vis-a-vis China in preparation for 
the ending of quotas under the Multi-Fibre Agreement.  GRUPO 
M\'s operation was the first attempt at co-production with 
Haiti.  END COMMENT. 
 
6.  Port-au-Prince minimize considered. 
HERTELL 
"
"17927","6/17/2004 21:01","04SANTODOMINGO3548","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03SANTODOMINGO3140","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 003548 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR, PREL, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: CERTIFICATION REPORT CARD, 2004 
 
REF: A. (A) MCISAAC-KUBISKE E-MAIL 6/16/04 
     B. (B) 03 SANTO DOMINGO 3140 
 
1. Following is the narcotics certification report card 2004 
for the Dominican Republic, requested Ref A (the 2003 report 
card is in Ref B). 
 
2. The United States Government (USG) worked with the 
Government of the Dominican Republic (GODR) to continue 
progress on establishing a regular and predictable process of 
extradition, including extradition of Dominican nationals. 
 
-- The GODR has in place a regular process that has worked 
most of the time and has resulted in 57 extraditions since 
President Mejia took office in 2000 and 75 since the program 
became active in 1998.  In each case, the Embassy receives a 
cable with a full extradition package requesting extradition 
of a subject.  The Embassy sends a diplomatic note to the 
Foreign Ministry, which in turn notifies the Attorney 
General, who issues a provisional arrest warrant for 
extradition.  The subject is then arrested and questioned, in 
accordance with provisions of Dominican law.  The Attorney 
General makes a recommendation to the President, who makes a 
final decision after consulting with his legal adviser.  The 
extradition warrant is signed and the fugitive is returned to 
the United States accompanied by a U.S. Marshal. 
 
3. There have been a few questionable cases within the past 
year.  One fugitive was released from custody, subsequently 
re-arrested, and extradited.  Four fugitives were arrested 
and released without any notice to the Embassy.  We continue 
to follow up on these cases with the expectation that 
extraditions are still possible. 
 
4. The USG continued to urge the GODR to investigate and 
prosecute violators of the enhanced anti-money laundering law 
that expanded the crime of money laundering to beyond drugs 
to include other \"serious crimes\" as defined in the OAS model 
anti-money laundering law. 
 
-- The GODR\'s multi-agency money laundering investigation 
unit, established last year under the National Drugs Council 
and headed by Lic. David Perez under the supervision of drug 
czar Bonaparte Gautreaux, has been slow to get organized and 
is still not fully functioning.  The National Anti-Drug 
Department (DNCD), the National Police, and the Banking 
Superintendency each have their own money laundering 
investigation units. 
 
5. The USG has continued to press the GODR to take steps to 
address money laundering through remittance businesses and 
the smuggling of bulk cash shipments across borders. 
 
-- Drug czar Gautreaux last year planned to assign 
investigators to money laundering by remittance and through 
the Dominican Republic\'s many casinos, but has done little in 
either area. 
 
6. The USG continues to work with the GODR to implement 
training programs and reforms to ensure that asset forfeiture 
becomes an effective and regular part of criminaal 
prosecutions; substantial assets remain to be forfeited owing 
to significant delays in the processing of properties through 
the criminal justice system. 
 
-- The GODR continues to take full advantage of law 
enforcement training and seminars offered by the USG, 
including current training at the National Police Academy. 
The USAID programs on Rule of Law/Human Rights and on 
Anti-Corruption have substantial training components directed 
to the justice system.  NAS has offered training in asset 
forfeiture during FY 2004, for example a visit in March by 
GODR bank supervisors and money laundering investigators to 
the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) in 
Washington and a June visit by bank regulators from the 
Financial Intelligence Unit and the Financial Analysis Unit 
to the annual Egmont meeting. 
 
7. The USG has proposed that the GODR enact legislative 
reforms to streamline asset forfeiture procedures, to permit 
forfeiture of property held by fugitives or deceased 
criminals, and to clarify authority for enforcement of 
foreign forfeiture orders. 
 
-- Embassy representatives have discussed this proposal with 
legislators. 
 
8. The USG has worked with the GODR to continue to engage 
with the governments of the United States and Haiti in a 
regional strategy for combating drug trafficking and criminal 
activity across the island of Hispaniola.  Many GODR offers 
of cooperation and joint training to the Government of Haiti, 
reinforced by the Embassy, brought minimal results, and 
Haiti\'s political crisis, widespread violence, and change of 
government this year have suspended these efforts. 
Cross-border law enforcement cooperation has been limited to 
small, localized operations. 
 
9. The USG asked the GODR to continue to implement the 1995 
Dominican-U.S. bilateral maritime interdiction agreement and 
to implement related bilateral agreements. 
 
-- The GODR continues to cooperate fully under the 1995 
agreement concerning maritime counter-drug operations. 
 
-- Under the 2003 protocol to the 1995 agreement, the GODR 
continues to permit U.S. overflight of the Dominican Republic 
and law enforcement operations by U.S. Coast Guard 
detachments embarked on ships of third-country governments. 
 
-- The GODR has implemented a 2003 agreement concerning 
cooperation in maritime migration law enforcement to combat 
migrant smuggling. 
 
10. The USG requested continued GODR cooperation in 
international and multinational interdiction operations. 
 
-- The GODR continues to cooperate fully in interdiction 
operations. The DNCD has implemented a DEA plan to establish 
additional specialized units covering ports and airports. 
 
11. The USG asked the GODR to enact comprehensive 
anti-corruption legislation to promote and strengthen 
mechanisms to prevent, punish, and erradicate corruption 
among public officials. 
 
-- USAID continues to work with both houses of Congress and 
the judiciary to develop anti-corruption legislation. 
Legislative proposals pending before Congress include laws on 
government procurement, freedom of information, an 
independent prosecutor against corruption, public defenders, 
and a strengthened controller general.  A law mandating an 
integrated financial management system has been passed and is 
being implemented.  These laws will demonstrate progress 
toward compliance with the Inter-American Convention against 
Corruption, which the Dominican Republic has signed and 
ratified. 
 
12. The USG pressed the GODR to take actions, such as 
vigorous prosecutions, against instances of public corruption 
to promote the effectiveness, efficiency, and integrity of 
Dominican public institutions. 
 
-- The GODR has prosecuted some officials, but there have 
been no convictions.  The collapse of three banks including 
Baninter in 2003 has led to ongoing prosecution of several 
former bank executives, in what has become a test of the 
GODR\'s ability to fight corruption.  The GODR removed two 
officials from senior positions in which they were almost 
certainly engaged in corrupt practices. 
 
13. The USG asked the GODR to create mechanisms to enforce 
standards of conduct and to continue to establish systems for 
disclosing income, asets, and liabilities by public 
officials, such as the publication on the internet of judges\' 
financial disclosure statements. 
 
-- Congress is considering a proposed law requiring a sworn 
declaration of assets by non-judicial public officials. 
 
14. The USG asked the GODR to increase cooperation among 
Dominican military, customs, migration, and law enforcement 
agencies to tighten border and port security. 
 
-- Over a dozen agencies collaborated and cooperated closely 
with U.S. law enforcement agencies to improve security at 
international airports and seaports in the Dominican 
Republic.  In particular, CESA, the airport security agency, 
are working directly with on-site U.S. experts to improve the 
performance of airport security personnel.  Indeed, the 
security plans for the Dominican Republic\'s main airport, in 
Santo Domingo, were entirely revamped in 2004.  The National 
Police, military intelligence, and DNCD information systems 
units worked to create a network for sharing of information 
in their data bases. 
 
15. The USG asked the GODR to increase the interdiction of 
drugs and illegal weapons. 
 
-- Law enforcement agencies of the GODR continue to cooperate 
fully with U.S. counterparts.  Official DNCD reports indicate 
a slight decrease in drugs seized this year.  However, 
Dominican authorities apprehended leaders of a major 
trafficking organization in December and since then have 
arrested 1,489 narco-traffickers including the head of a 
multi-national criminal organization operating from the 
Dominican Republic and a fugitive wanted by DEA, and have 
seized 33 weapons and 376 kilos of cocaine. 
 
16. The USG asked the GODR to increase the number of arrests 
and prosecutions of major traffickers. 
 
-- The GODR has continued to concentrate law enforcement 
efforts on high-level trafficking organizations, with 
increasing results in arrests of traffickers of particular 
interest to the USG.  Five principal subjects are currently 
under investigation, with the assistance of a DNCD-run wire 
intercept unit, which has continued to accumulate evidence 
useful in investigation of major organizations. 
HERTELL 
"
"17971","6/18/2004 22:49","04SANTODOMINGO3617","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 003617 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR AND EB/IFD/ODF 
PLEASE PASS TO EX-IM BANK 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, DR 
SUBJECT: GODR PUBLIC FINANCING STRAINED 
 
 
 1.  (SBU)  Central Bank Manager Apolinar Veloz told Econoff 
June 18 that GODR non-financial public sector finances are 
seriously off track from the IMF agreement for the first 
trimester of 2004.  Veloz\'s remarks track with what Technical 
Secretary Carlos Despradel reported to the DCM June 1. 
 
SIPDIS 
Despradel had said that due to inadequate tracking of 
bilateral project-related loans by government credit agencies 
and government letters of credit drawn on GODR-owned Banco de 
Reservas (BanReservas), the government had accumulated 
significantly more debt than it had reported while 
negotiating the IMF agreement.  Veloz reaffirmed that 
President Mejia has frozen all project loans in an effort to 
get government expenditures back on track. 
 
2.  (SBU)  According to Veloz, non-financial public sector 
debt cannot increase if the GODR is to meet the IMF targets, 
but added that BanReservas and other banks have steadily 
increased their lending to the GODR.  Veloz said that the 
Monetary Board on June 17 approved his initiative to 
immediately stop all lending to the government by BanReservas 
and other commercial banks. 
 
3.  (SBU)  Central Bank statistics show that not counting 
off-budget \"residuals,\" non financial public sector 
expenditures exceeded programmed amounts by 6.4 billion pesos 
($135 million).  In addition, Veloz explained that the GODR 
had spent five billion pesos on the electricity sector and an 
additional 1.5 billion pesos on propane gas subsidies that 
was off-budget.  There was also non-explained residual 
expenditures of more than 2 billion pesos.  In total, 
including current expenditures, capital expenditures and 
residual, the GODR overspent nearly 9 billion pesos ($187.5) 
during the first trimester.  Veloz estimated that the 
consolidated deficit would be about four percent of GDP. 
 
4.  (SBU)  Both the current PRD government and the incoming 
Fernandez administration recognize the urgency of the fiscal 
imbalance and are now working together on possible fiscal 
reform measures.  They have met jointly with the IMF on at 
least two occasions and debt sustainability was reportedly a 
key point in those discussions. 
 
5.  (SBU)  Debt presents a looming problem.  The Paris Club 
agreement to reschedule nearly $200 million in bilateral debt 
(plus $120 million in GODR debt to the private sector) could 
unravel if the GODR is not on track with the Fund.  None of 
the analysis takes into account the internal arrears owed to 
the electricity sector that reportedly total some $450 
million.  Veloz would not speculate on a total figure for the 
electricity sector, admitting that it was a \"black hole.\" 
Nor does it include the quasi-fiscal deficit of nearly 80 
billion pesos the Central Bank holds in certificates of 
deposit.  Moreover those certificates carry a weighted 
average interest rate of about 40 percent, according to 
Veloz, and make it extremely difficult to meet the Fund 
program\'s monetary target. 
 
6.  (SBU) The practical effect of the GODR\'s financial woes 
is being felt first in the electrical sector.  This week, the 
country is producing less than 60 percent of demand due to 
plant shut downs over non-payment.  The Embassy also has 
reports of U.S. companies not being paid for government 
contracts.  One such case involves a water project reportedly 
backed by EX-IM Bank guarantees.  There are also reports of 
the Army not being able to purchase fuel for its vehicles or 
helicopters, and the Navy unable to purchase fuel or perform 
routine maintenance on its boats. 
 
7.  (SBU) Comment: In light of the financial uncertainty and 
USG interest in the GODR getting back on track with the IMF 
program, Embassy recommends that the USG postpone further 
consideration of bilateral lending for procurement or 
infrastructure projects.  Moving forward with such proposals 
sends conflicting messages to the GODR and puts the 
government at increased risk of default.  Moreover, new loans 
at this time may not reflect the priorities of the new 
administration that will be inaugurated August 16, and may 
not be within the framework of a fiscal reform package. 
 
KUBISKE 
"
"18027","6/22/2004 10:57","04SANTODOMINGO3626","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SANTODOMINGO3313","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 003626 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/PPC AND DRL;NSC FOR SHANNON AND 
MADISON;LABOR FOR ILAB;TREASURY FOR LAMONICA AND OASIA; 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN TRANSITION # 3: SIDES ENGAGE ON IMF AND 
TAX REFORM; EMBASSY SPENDS A DAY WITH THE INCOMING 
ADMINISTRATION 
 
REF: A. SANTO DOMINGO 3313 
 
     B. SANTO DOMINGO 3358 
 
1.  (U) This is cable no. 3 in our series on the transition 
to a new administration in the Dominican Republic. 
 
SIDES ENGAGE ON IMF AND TAX REFORM 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Fiscal reform, necessarily the hot topic 
----------------------------------------- 
 
As the power outages continue and the balance sheets show 
more red than black, the Dominican Republic is faced with the 
critical need for fiscal reform sooner rather than later.  At 
a full day PLD-Embassy transition conference on June 17, PLD 
transition leader Danilo Media confirmed that President-elect 
Leonel Fernandez and President Hipolito Mejia will meet for a 
mini-summit on Tuesday, June 22, under the benevolent 
sponsorship of Msgr Agripino Nunez, rector of the catholic 
university PUCCMM.  They will announce the joint initiative 
to have a fiscal reform package to Congress no later than 
July 15.  An IMF technical advisor arrived in the country on 
June 21 to assist the PLD and PRD teams in preparing a reform 
package that will satisfy both sides and comply with the 
terms of the IMF agreement. In effect, the PLD is already 
negotiating with the Fund. 
 
The technical teams for both parties are experienced and 
realize the gravity of the situation.  They met three times 
at a senior level, and for almost a week the mid-level 
technicians from Finance and the Presidency have been working 
directly with the PLD to elaborate a proposal to discuss with 
the Fund.  The aim is to have a proposal ready by July 10 and 
for President Mejia to forward the PLD plan to Congress on 
July 15th.  Daniel Toribio, former finance minister in 
Fernandez\'s first administration and one of the key PLD 
transition committee members, told us that fiscal reform, \"is 
a political problem and nothing else.  The numbers are there, 
we have to make it work.\" Carlos Despradel, PRD Technical 
Secretary of the Presidency, says that the PLD now 
 
SIPDIS 
understands the extent of the fiscal challenge. 
 
Monsignor Agripino Nunez will be the mediator at the 
mini-summit on June 22.  Behind the scenes, former Spanish 
President Felipe Gonzalez, the Spanish Ambassador, the EU 
Representative, and Ambassador Hertell have played 
significant roles in bringing the two sides together. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
EMBASSY SPENDS A DAY WITH THE INCOMING ADMINISTRATION 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
On June 17 the Ambassador hosted a day-long conference at his 
residence between the PLD transition team with its advisors 
and the staff of the Embassy.  Medina\'s announcement to us of 
the plans for the PLD/PRD mini-summit came at the kickoff 
breakfast.  The PLD transition team leaders (Medina, Montas, 
Toribio, Puig, Morales Troncoso, Pena Guaba, Gonzalez 
Espinoza and Prota - reftel A), the Ambassador and Emboffs 
started the day with a discussion of common interests, the 
need to look forward now (rather than wait until August 16) 
and a reiterated offer by the Embassy to help bring the PLD 
and PRD together on difficult issues. 
 
After the breakfast, the conference continued with a morning 
schedule of three hour-long meetings to share USG priorities 
and perceptions with PLD leaders on the following areas: 1) 
Trade issues/Macroeconomic Issues/D-CAFTA, 2) Anti-corruption 
and Judicial sector issues, 3) Consular Issues and 
Trafficking in Persons.  A mid-day lunch allowed the PLD 
transition team and emboffs to recap the morning\'s topics and 
discuss the USG position on human rights.  The afternoon 
session included expanded exchanges on: 1) Military, Law 
Enforcement and Counter-terrorism issues, 2) Energy, and 3) 
Social Responsibility issues (Health, Education and the 
Environment). 
Our invitation to the conference had pressed the PLD to name 
working level members for each of the group discussions, 
which it did.  On average, the meetings consisted of 18 PLD 
members per subject meeting, four members of the core PLD 
transition team, the Ambassador and eight Emboffs.  Some 85 
Fernandez people attended all or part of the sessions.  Most 
of the PLD attendees have prior government experience. 
 
The conference also accomplished USG goals of sharing our 
priorities and concerns on each topic, establishing working 
links and pledging follow-up meetings in each area.  In 
addition, the PLD experts educated their own PLD transition 
team in many areas, most prominently during the social 
responsibility meeting on education, health and the 
environment. 
 
During the macroeconomic session, Julio Ortega asked if the 
USG would provide a USD 25 million cushion for fuel 
financing, to ease the situation for the poor.  Emboffs 
responded that the request might be given consideration after 
the Dominican Republic got its house in order with the IMF. 
During the discussion on law enforcement and 
counter-terrorism, former national police chief Euclides 
Gutierez Feliz noted the importance of the USG third border 
initiative and asked for information on security guidelines 
under this program.  Emboffs will provide information as well 
as port and airport security guidelines. 
 
In the anti-corruption meeting, Onofe Rojas mentioned the aim 
of PLD leaders to combat corruption, echoing the sentiments 
of the new Secretary General of the OAS in stating that, 
\"corruption is the cancer of Latin America.\" 
 
 
Numerous PLD attendees approached Emboffs to thank us for the 
opportunity to discuss the issues and provide them with 
contacts and a \"jumping off point\" for continued 
collaboration.  Throughout the day, and especially in the 
Economic, Anti-corruption and Military/Law Enforcement 
meetings, the PLD attendees expressed appreciation for the 
early opportunity to confirm that the PLD and the USG share 
many of the same goals.  Max Puig, one the PLD core 
transition team members who attended every meeting, 
approached the DCM to express his \"sincere appreciation for 
U.S. efforts to make the transition in the Dominican Republic 
the best one ever.\" 
 
 
------------ 
What\'s next? 
------------ 
 
Short term, the next priority for the PLD transition team is 
the June 22 mini-summit.  Medina told us that Fernandez had 
specified that the summit needs to be, \"more than a photo 
opportunity,\" which it should be with the public announcement 
of the fiscal reform pledge.  The PLD will also have to 
confront the ever worsening electricity situation (septel to 
follow) in order to keep the lights on in the country. 
Finally, the PLD will have to continue to work at the 
technical level with their PRD counterparts, keeping in check 
any impulses for mutual blame in order to ensure that there 
is an adequate transfer of information and an otherwise 
smooth transition from one administration to the next. 
The Embassy will build on the transition conference, moving 
to smaller group meetings with PLD counterparts on specific 
issues.  At all levels we will seek out the names of 
potential nominees to key positions, pointing out the dangers 
and potential repercussions of naming less than desirable 
candidates to head ministries or agencies.  We will 
reemphasize our offer to bring the PLD and PRD together when 
needed.  Finally, we will continue to work closely with the 
current administration to keep programs on track and 
encourage cooperation between the outgoing and incoming 
administrations. 
 
2.  (U)  Drafted by Angela Kerwin. 
 
3.  (U)  This report and others in the series are available 
on our SIPRNET site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/  along with 
extensive other material. 
KUBISKE 
"
"18028","6/22/2004 10:57","04SANTODOMINGO3627","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO3617","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 003627 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EB/IFD/ODF AND WHA/CAR; 
PLEASE PASS TO EX-IM BANK 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, ECON, DR 
SUBJECT: RECOMMENDATION ON FINANCING OF MARINE PATROL 
VESSELS 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 3617 
 
 (SBU) Further to reftel, Embassy recommends against U.S. 
Ex-Im Bank financing of marine patrol vessels for the 
Dominican navy at this time for the following reasons: 
 
-- The Dominican Republic\'s fiscal deficit and inability to 
meet IMF debt targets presents repayment risk on existing 
debt, and additional loans would increase that risk; 
 
-- The Embassy\'s Military Assistance and Advisory Group 
(MAAG) does not support the GODR Navy\'s purchase of 
additional vessels until the new government (to be installed 
16 August) develops cogent national security and national 
military strategies that demonstrate the need for such 
vessels; 
 
-- The Dominican Navy lacks sufficient funds to purchase fuel 
or to maintain adequately ships that it purchased only last 
year; 
 
-- Additional bilateral lending at this time conflicts with 
President Mejia\'s directive to halt project loans and with 
USG efforts to support fiscal discipline to meet Fund 
objectives. 
KUBISKE 
"
"18029","6/22/2004 10:59","04SANTODOMINGO3629","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 003629 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS WHA/CAR MCISAAC 
DEPT PASS TO TREASURY LLAMONICA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, ECON, ENRG, EINV 
SUBJECT: ELECTRICITY SITUATION IN THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
CONTINUES TO WORSEN 
 
 
1.  SUMMARY.  The Dominican Republic\'s electricity sector has 
witnessed a steady decline in energy production over the last 
month, with blackouts in many areas reaching 15 to 20 hours 
daily.  The situation is expected to intensify Tuesday, June 
22, when AES\' Andres plant goes off-line for lack of fuel and 
generation will equal approximately half of peak demand. 
Sector representatives have met with President-elect Leonel 
Fernandez to discuss the sector\'s problems.  According to 
Secretary of Finance Rafael Calderon, the GODR is 
 
SIPDIS 
implementing a plan now to assure payments for current 
monthly costs, which will keep the sector running until the 
end of August.  END SUMMARY. 
 
LET THERE BE LIGHT, PLEASE! 
 
2.  The Dominican Republic has witnessed a steady decline in 
energy production over the last month.  Blackouts have become 
a daily occurrence with many areas experiencing 15 to 20 
hours with no electricity.  The system is presently 
generating approximately 1000 to 1100 MW daily, a 30% deficit 
during peak demand.  This number will likely decrease 
significantly starting Tuesday, June 22, when the AES Andres 
plant shuts down for lack of fuel.  Andres has been 
generating 220 MW daily, out of a capacity of 300 MW, in an 
effort to lengthen the number of days it can produce 
electricity given their fuel supply.  AES is not the only 
generator using this tactic.  Cogentrix, El Paso, and others 
have been operating in a similar fashion.  The drop in 
production could result in a deficit of approximately 45% 
during peak demand.  (The system collapses at about 500 MW. 
The country suffered through 700 - 800 MW daily during parts 
of this past winter.)  However, this may be offset by El 
Paso, which received a fuel shipment last week and is looking 
to increase its production, and Itabo, whose two plants were 
shutdown for mechanical problems and are expected to come 
back on-line during the first two weeks of July. 
 
HE SAID, SHE SAID 
 
3.  The situation has been aggravated by the recent 
recurrence of the public dispute between the GODR and the 
generators over the status of debts.  According to a report 
presented by the generating companies to Leonel Fernandez and 
the PLD transition team Friday, June 11, the debt to the 
generators exceeds $413.7 million.  Of that amount, $260 
million is GODR debt and $154 million from Ede-Este.  That 
sum does not include debt owed between generators nor 
disputed amounts between the GODR and AES and Haina. 
According to the GODR, it has reached agreement on debt owed 
with all the generators except AES and Haina.  The GODR is 
arguing that it has no debt with AES or Haina and that it is 
the generators who owe the GODR for sale of energy and 
transmission fees from CDE.  In a meeting with Secretary of 
Finance Rafael Calderon Friday, June 18, DCM asked Calderon 
about the status of the debts.  Calderon noted that the GODR 
and AES planned to meet this week to discuss the matter. 
 
COMPANIES PRESENT THEIR CASE TO LEONEL 
 
4.  On Friday, June 11, generating companies held a day-long 
meeting with President-elect Leonel Fernandez and PLD 
transition team representatives.  Independent consultants 
also attended.  The session was a brief analysis of the 
sector with the purpose of bringing the new administration up 
to date on pending issues.  The generators told the incoming 
administration that the government was its own worse enemy in 
the sector because it is too involved.  The GODR, they noted, 
controls 100% of transmissions, 83% of distribution, and 45% 
of generation.  The new administration was specifically 
interested in learning more about: 1) net amount owed by the 
GODR; 2) tariffs; and 3) Cogentrix.  Fernandez mentioned to 
the group that he is creating a sub-committee to concentrate 
specifically on the energy sector and that he would announce 
the committee members soon. 
 
CALDERON OPTIMISTIC ABOUT FINANCES 
 
5.  According to Calderon, the GODR is implementing a plan to 
assure payments for current monthly costs, which will keep 
the rest of the sector running until the end of August.  This 
includes paying the $13 million it currently owes Cogentrix 
before the deadline of July 9.  With Cogentrix and El Paso 
on-line now, and Itabo coming on-line in July it seems 
possible the system will sustain itself for the next two 
months. 
 
6.  Port au Prince minimize considered. 
KUBISKE 
"
"18043","6/22/2004 13:59","04SANTODOMINGO3667","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO3626|04STATE126171","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 003667 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR MCISAAC AND G/TIP LINDERMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: USG REPORT ON TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS HITS 
DOMINICAN NEWS 
 
REF: A. STATE 126171 
     B. SANTO DOMINGO 3626 
 
 1.  (U)  Embassy Santo Domingo delivered the Dominican 
Republic section of the  2003 Trafficking in Persons (TIP) 
report to the Foreign Ministry on June 14; the Embassy press 
release on the subject made all the dailies the next day. 
The story grew as on June 16, in response to a written 
question, the Embassy confirmed USG revocation of the B1/B2 
visa of former Director of Migration, Miguel Vasquez in 
December 2002, under section 212(a)(6)(E) (alien smuggling) 
of the U.S. Immigration and Nationality Act.  The visa 
revocation story led the news on the 17th and continued to 
have extensive media coverage on Friday, June 18.  Less 
public, but just as important, were informal discussions on 
consular and TIP issues between emboffs and representatives 
of the Fernandez government to be inaugurated on August 16. 
End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
TIP report delivered - official response limited to date 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
2.  (U)  Trafficking in Persons (TIP) was on the front pages 
and in private discussions last week in the Dominican 
Republic.  On June 14, poloffs delivered the 2003 Trafficking 
in Persons report and reftel talking points to Ambassador 
Rogert Espaillat, Deputy Director of the Americas Desk at the 
GODR Foreign Ministry.  Espaillat noted the importance of the 
report and thanked us for our efforts to work with the 
Dominican Republic to improve its record on TIP issues. 
Poloffs stressed the need for continued efforts to enforce 
the 2003 anti-TIP law and urged the need for arrests and 
prosecutions.  Ambassador Espaillat agreed that the GODR has 
taken the first steps to combat TIP, but needs vigorous 
future efforts. 
 
3.  (U)  Poloffs explained that the \"watch list\" designation 
means that the GODR will be subject to an interim status 
report on its anti-TIP efforts.  Ambassador Espaillat 
acknowledged the designation and stated that he would pass 
all the information to Foreign Minister Guerrero Prats. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Editorial reaction mixed, but no defense to content of TIP 
report 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
4.  (U)  The Embassy issued a press release on the 2003 TIP 
report on the afternoon of June 14th.  The press release and 
the 2003 TIP report were featured in the Santo Domingo 
dailies over the next two days.  Editorial reaction was 
mixed.  Respected newspaper \"El Caribe\" stated, \"The picture 
presented by the U.S. Department of State on trafficking in 
persons in the Dominican Republic is gut wrenching . . . the 
sad part behind this situation is the impunity that 
permanently seems to protect the organizers of this trade. . 
. the government must vigorously assume responsibility to put 
a stop to these crimes, pursuing and arresting traffickers.\" 
 
5.  (U)  \"Hoy\" editors acknowledged a problem in the 
Dominican Republic: \"U.S. preaching on (TIP) may be offensive 
to many Dominicans, but we\'ve been lax and need to tighten 
up.\"  Left-of-center, independent \"El Nacional\" took offense 
to the U.S. role in producing the report, but did not deny 
the accuracy of its content.  \"El Nacional\" asserted, \"No 
institution or world forum has given the United States the 
right or authority to condemn or take over other nations . . 
.(the report) would be valid if it came from an organization 
such as the United Nations (or other multilaterals).\" 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Visa revocation shows USG serious on alien smugglers/anti-TIP 
efforts 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
6.  (U)  On June 16, the Embassy\'s press section responded to 
a written request from \"El Caribe\" newspaper regarding the 
revocation of the B1/B2 visa of Miguel Vasquez (until March 
2004 Director of Migration, currently Minister without 
Portfolio and Special Assistant to President Mejia).  The 
next day, all dailies reported that the former Migration 
Director\'s B1/B2 visa had been revoked in December 2002, 
under section 212(a)(6)(E) (alien smuggling) of the U.S. 
Immigration and Nationality Act. 
 
7.  (U) The front page headlines on the visa revocation came 
on June 17, the day of  day-long consultations between 
Fernandez transition team members of the Dominican Liberation 
Party (PLD) and the US Embassy (reftel B).  During a kickoff 
breakfast for the event, the Ambassador used the headlines as 
his opening to discuss the importance of anti-corruption 
efforts and to indicate seriousness of the USG in pursuing 
alien smugglers and traffickers. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Transition leaders learn about TIP issues 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
8.  (U)  Ref A points were made by the Ambassador and other 
emboffs throughout the day, and specifically and in detail 
during the session on anti-corruption and the session 
dedicated to consular and TIP issues.  During the 
consular/TIP session, poloff presented PLD transition team 
members with copies of the 2003 TIP report (Dominican 
Republic portion) and explained the Department\'s evaluation 
criteria.  PLD attendees were receptive and grateful for the 
information.  Emboffs will arrange further discussions with 
the PLD transition team  to explain TIP and emphasize the 
importance of the GODR\'s role in combating TIP, arresting 
those involved and ensuring that the accused are prosecuted. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
9.  (SBU)  The timing could not have been better.  The June 
14 release of the 2003 TIP report gave the Embassy the 
opportunity to acknowledge the anti-TIP efforts of the 
current administration while stressing that considerable work 
remains to be done - especially in enforcement of the 2003 
anti-TIP law.  The press play on the release of the TIP 
report and on the Vasquez visa revocation put the issue in 
the minds of the policymakers and soon-to-be officials of the 
administration that will take office August 16.  We used the 
transition conference to lay out to them the principles of 
the USG approach to TIP and to explain the need -- moral, 
humanitarian and bilateral -- to put anti-TIP efforts at the 
top of the agenda.  They appeared receptive to our call to 
enforce the anti-TIP law and to arrest and to prosecute those 
involved with TIP and alien smuggling. 
 
10.  (U)  Drafted by Angela Kerwin. 
 
11.  (U)  This report and others are available on our SIPRNET 
site at http:/www/state/sgov/p/wha/santodomingo/ along with 
extensive other material. 
HERTELL 
"
"18078","6/23/2004 12:43","04SANTODOMINGO3694","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE132748","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

231243Z Jun 04

 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 003694 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR AND IO/UNP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, OTRA, OVIP, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: ATTENDANCE AT 59TH UNGA 
 
REF: STATE 132748 
 
(SBU) MFA deputy director of international organizations 
affairs Rhadys Abreu de Polanco informed us June 21 that, 
owing to the current transition to a new administration, 
plans for GODR representation to the 59th UNGA will not be 
available until after President-elect Leonel Fernandez 
assumes office on August 16 and announces his cabinet 
appointments.  As soon as the new foreign policy team is 
named, Embassy will follow up to obtain the information 
requested reftel. 
HERTELL 
"
"18167","6/25/2004 17:45","04SANTODOMINGO3749","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 003749 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR AND WHA/AND 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI; SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/26/2014 
TAGS: PREL, EPET, DR, VE 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN TRANSITION #4: PRESIDENT-ELECT\'S VISIT 
TO VENEZUELAN PRESIDENT CHAVEZ 
 
Classified By: Economic and Political Counselor Michael Meigs for Reaso 
n 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (SBU) This no. 4 in our series on the transition to a new 
presidential administration in the Dominican Republic. 
 
DOMINICAN PRESIDENT-ELECT\'S VISIT TO VENEZUELAN PRESIDENT 
CHAVEZ 
 
(U) Dominican President-elect Leonel Fernandez stopped over 
in Caracas to call on President Hugo Chavez June 20-21. Press 
reports centered upon Fernandez\'s mention of the $250 million 
in financing credits accumulated to date under the terms of 
the San Jose Accord (a percentage of payments for Venezuelan 
petroleum accrues to finance development projects, with the 
stipulation that 50 percent of the content come from 
Venezuela).  This is not news, and in fact the amount 
accumulated is testimony rather to the difficulty in finding 
appropriate Venezuelan products to finance.  The Mejia 
government periodically drew on this trade line to import 
asphalt for road construction, a practice that ended last 
year.  A U.S. firm currently has the exclusive contract to 
supply asphalt to the Dominican government. 
 
(C) Following mid-2003 interruptions of Venezuelan exports to 
the Dominican Republic due in large part to technical 
problems at PDVSA, Chavez \"suspended\" exports from August 
2003 to November 2004 with the demand that Mejia\'s government 
take action against \"conspiracies.\" Documents eventually 
presented to the Domincan MFA related an eccentric series of 
charges against industrialist Gustavo Cisneros, made by 
third-country nationals. They provided no basis for Dominican 
action against Cisneros, who has a vacation home here and is 
well liked, including by President Mejia. 
 
(SBU)  Fernandez\'s stop in Caracas was for a courtesy call 
and photo op.  It led journalists, officials, and a PLD 
legislator to speculate that the President-elect was working 
on obtaining more favorable prices for petroleum.  The PLD\'s 
only senator, Jose Tomas Perez, assured us the visit had 
focused on oil supplies and that there were no implications 
for Dominican policies toward the United States; in 
particular, he said, it should not be interpreted as 
signaling any support by President-elect Fernandez for 
Chavez\'s anti-U.S. stance. A senior MFA contact characterized 
the visit as just another stop in Fernandez\'s tour around the 
region in advance of the inauguration 
 
(SBU)  We understand the President-elect was accompanied by 
his wife Margareta Cedeno de Fernandez, his personal staff, 
and former industry and commerce minister Luis Manuel 
Bonetti, Fernandez\'s campaign finance chairman and the PLD\'s 
finance chief. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Bainbridge Cowell. 
 
3. (U) This report and others in our election and transition 
series can be read on the SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ index.cfm along 
with extensive other current material. 
HERTELL 
"
"18218","6/29/2004 10:57","04SANTODOMINGO3825","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE100077|04STATE135512","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 003825 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CCA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, ETTC, CU, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC - CUBA: COUNTRY-BY-COUNTRY 
REVIEW OF WAIVER OF TITLE III, LIBERTAD ACT 
 
REF: A. (A) STATE 135512 
     B. (B) STATE 100077 (NOTAL) 
 
1. (U)The Dominican Government this year provided decisive 
support to the cause of improving prospects for human rights 
and democracy in Cuba.  Secretary Powell sent a letter to 
President Mejia (Ref B) thanking him for the Dominican 
Republic\'s \"yes\" vote on the Cuba resolution in the 60th 
Human Rights Commission meeting in Geneva.  The resolution 
passed by one vote, so the Dominican support was crucial to 
passage.  Equally important was subsequent GODR support for a 
procedural motion that resulted in the withdrawal of a Cuban 
resolution critical of U.S. policy concerning detainees at 
the Guantanamo Naval Base.  Dominican support helped prevent 
the Cuban Government from diverting attention from its 
violations of the human rights of the Cuban people. 
 
2. (SBU) A senior official of the Secretariat of Industry and 
Trade told us June 23 that there is very little Dominican 
investment in Cuba and that he is unaware of any conflict 
between Dominican investors and American citizens with 
property claims in Cuba.  Similarly, Embassy is unaware of 
any complaints by American citizens against any Dominican 
company related to any investment in Cuba or DR-Cuba trade. 
Embassy believes that U.S. national interests and the actions 
of the GODR fully justify a renewal of the waiver of Title 
III of the Libertad Act with regard to Dominican businesses 
that may be involved in joint ventures with the Government of 
Cuba or have significant trading relationships with Cuba. 
 
3. (SBU) Embassy considers that, if the waiver were not 
renewed and an American citizen were to bring suit against a 
Dominican entity under Title III, the extraterritorial reach 
of Title III could affect future Dominican support for 
diplomatic initiatives on behalf of human rights and 
fundamental freedoms in Cuba. 
HERTELL 
"
"18238","6/29/2004 15:43","04SANTODOMINGO3841","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE139422","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 003841 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR WHA/CAR AND WHA/CCA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF, PREL, SMIG, MARR, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: RESETTLEMENT OF PROTECTED 
CUBAN AND HAITIAN MIGRANTS 
 
REF: STATE 139422 
 
1. (SBU) Embassy understands the importance of the 
resettlement of protected Cuban and Haitian migrants 
presently at Guantanamo Naval Base and will offer all 
appropriate assistance.  The Dominican Republic is in the 
midst of a government transition and inauguration day for the 
new administration is seven weeks off.  President-elect 
Leonel Fernandez has not yet named any of his cabinet choices. 
 
2. (SBU) Embassy is in regular contact with leaders of 
Fernandez\'s transition team and will raise this request with 
them at the first opportunity.  However, they will not be in 
a position to reply until after inauguration day, August 16. 
HERTELL 
"
"18340","7/1/2004 20:33","04SANTODOMINGO3906","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 003906 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/OMA;NSC FOR SHANNON 
AND MADISON; TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA;USDOC FOR 
3322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION; USDOC FOR 
3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH;DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI; SOUTHCOM 
ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, ECON, EFIN, DR, SP 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN TRANSITION #5: PACT BECOMES FACT 
 
 
1. (SBU) This no. 5 in our series on the transition to a new 
presidential administration in the Dominican Republic. 
 
(SBU) Dominican Transition:  Pact Becomes Fact 
 
The transition teams really are cooperating.  The government 
is likely to deliver a PLD-shaped tax reform to Congress by 
the target date of July 15.  Insistent efforts of the 
Ambassador and Embassy officers helped set the process in 
motion and keep it going. 
 
It was tempting on June 22 to say that we,d all seen this 
movie before: Hipolito Mejia and Leonel Fernandez accompanied 
by a hovering Monsignor Agripino Nunez as they signed a 
document promising good behavior and respect for carefully 
articulated rules of the game.    The last time the two men 
were together was in September 2003 when they signed a 
similar set of promises for the presidential campaign, 
recognizing the newest avatar of the civil-society \"Elections 
Monitoring Group\" (\"Comision de Seguimiento\").  And then in 
February of 2004, after ugly confrontations left some party 
followers dead in the street, the Monsignor brought together 
campaign party chairmen for a \"non-violence pact.\" 
 
In a country with electoral traditions and institutions as 
fragile as those of the Dominican Republic, this approach has 
some sense.   From his perch as rector of the catholic 
university PUCMM -- and even more as the perpetuum mobile of 
Dominican political arbitration -- Monsignor Nunez has the 
authority and credibility to insist on right conduct.  As 
before, party representatives negotiated the text, so their 
principals could come together just long enough for a chilly 
handshake and a signature.  (Our impression is that the chill 
is from Mejia; Fernandez seems to wish that the President 
would accept at least a pat on the shoulder.) 
 
Spain,s Felipe Gonzalez was the keynote speaker for the day, 
recycling socialist international themes about responsible 
government in his morning presentation before the two 
leaders, the transition teams, and the assembled Congress. 
 
Unacknowledged but fundamental to the process was the early 
engagement of the Ambassador and officers of Embassy Santo 
Domingo to urge cooperation and to carry messages between the 
two sides.  The Ambassador had lengthy private discussions 
with Fernandez and with Mejia. He invited the PLD transition 
team for a working lunch that resulted in a full-day seminar 
at his residence on June 17, bringing 85 PLD members or 
collaborating experts together with embassy counterparts. 
The Deputy Chief of Mission and EcoPol staff have 
systematically worked policymakers on both sides. 
 
And It Works 
 
The result is that the Mejia-Fernandez pact is working, at 
least in its most significant engagement -- that concerning 
Dominican commitments to the International Monetary Fund. 
 
The June 22 text sets forward the antecedents and establishes 
the following pledges: 
 
- both sides will maintain communication and furnish best 
efforts toward resolving the economic crisis; 
 
-  technicians from both sides, in consultation with the IMF, 
seek to prepare a tax reform proposal by July 10; 
 
- Mejia has already committed to submit the proposal to 
Congress not later than July 15; 
- both sides will work with members of Congress to obtain 
approval of it; 
 
- in keeping with the IMF standby, the incoming 
administration pledges to honor the terms of Central Bank 
certificates of deposit created to manage monetary policy; 
 
- also in keeping with the standby, the sides will coordinate 
actions to fulfill the pledges made to the Paris Club 
concerning the renegotiation of debt due in 2004; and 
 
- finally, the sides pledge to define and put into practice a 
plan of reforms for mid-term and long-term sustainability of 
the electricity sector. 
 
Confirming the Entente 
 
Financial policymakers for the sides held three extended 
meetings around the date of the pact.  According to Technical 
Secretary of the Presidency Carlos Despradel, at the first of 
 
SIPDIS 
these the government wanted to talk about conceptual 
approaches, while, figuratively speaking, the PLD reps had 
their calculators out and were ready to run the numbers on a 
government proposal that did not yet exist.  (Economist Andy 
Dauhajre, Jr., had drawn up an analysis and a draft for 
legislation, but the PRD was not ready to embrace it -- in 
fact, Despradel had to get the summary from the PLD,s Daniel 
Toribio.)  After the last of these three meetings, the PLD 
team appears to have taken on the job, with the assistance of 
government-employed technicians from the Finance Ministry and 
Central Bank. 
 
The President and President-elect signed their pact on 
Tuesday.  Fernandez departed immediately for meetings in New 
York.  On Friday, June 25, the Deputy Chief of Mission and 
EcoPol counselor attended a meeting at the Presidential 
Palace, where Despradel and Central Bank Governor Lois Malkun 
outlined difficulties in getting $100 million from private 
sector sources as a complement to the Paris Club official 
creditors, rescheduling (see separate report on SIPRNET). 
Sitting side by side with them, across the table from the 
Spanish ambassador, the EU ambassador, and the U.S. 
delegation, was PLD economist Julio Ortega.  Despradel and 
Malkun spoke freely in front of him; Ortega confirmed that he 
would be seeking policy guidance from Fernandez.   All three 
stressed that the transition teams were working closely 
together. 
 
Confidence 
 
At this point, strengthening confidence is the key to getting 
the Dominican Republic through its three-month transition 
still with the prospect of achieving some stability.  This 
was the principal aim of the June 22 pact.  It seems to be 
working for now.  Analysts in the international capital 
markets are making some cautiously optimistic noises, 
including about the prospect of seeing payment on the 
sovereign bond coupon due July 27.  Last week Malkun showed 
us with satisfaction the virtually flat graph for the 
exchange rate, and since that time the rate has subsided 
gradually from 48 toward 45 pesos to the dollar.   The press 
earnestly reads Fernandez,s trips to developed countries -- 
currently to Europe -- as a search for international 
investors. 
Meanwhile, widespread intermittent electricity blackouts are 
a reminder that smoke and mirrors are not sufficient for 
recovery, especially when that vital sector is completely 
decapitalized (the PLD,s Ortega commented to us, \"The crisis 
already occurred in that sector, three months ago; now we,re 
trying to identify a way out\"). 
 
Getting a Renewed Standby 
 
PLD senior officials Daniel Toribio and Temistocles Montas 
are in Washington today, July 1, for first formal PLD 
contacts with decision-makers at the IMF and  the U.S. 
Treasury, among other institutions, to talk about the Paris 
Club rescheduling. 
 
Their comments last week to the DCM suggest that they are 
thinking about a tax reform package that falls far short of 
closing the 2004 financing gap, something involving an 
increase in the value-added tax (\"ITBIS,\" currently at 12 
percent with many basic consumer goods exempted).  The press 
is suggesting a 16 percent rate.  PLD sources say that they 
do not -- repeat, not -- intend to propose a significant 
widening of the application of the tax.  Montas spoke of 
raising \"specific taxes\" on alcohol and tobacco.  PLD 
commentators say that subsidies on gas and electricity will 
be continued but readjusted for better targeting of 
low-income households.  As of now, it appears that they have 
no intention of using Fernandez,s 57 percent mandate to take 
sweeping, painful austerity measures to achieve early 
financial stability. 
 
The PLD Enigma 
 
A major unknown in this is Fernandez himself.  The PLD 
program, though extensive, is intentionally vague.  His close 
collaborators tell us that Fernandez has set up competing 
advisory committees, so that he can receive the broadest 
possible range of options.  For example, he invited leading 
stakeholders in various sectors to collaborate to find a 
consensus of recommendations (for example, a leading dairy 
industrialist, a milk importer, and a representative of 
supermarkets); in parallel, he set PLD experts to make 
recommendations but directed the industry committees not to 
share results with them.  No one is quite sure where the 
President-elect will come out on any of this, and no one 
claims to have the slightest idea whom he will name to 
cabinet posts.  The PLD transition to date under Fernandez 
completely contrasts with the PLD,s historical stereotype of 
a rigidly doctrinaire mechanism dominated by a politburo. 
 
Getting to \"Yes\" 
 
Whatever the shape of the package, the PRD-dominated Congress 
will have to examine it.  Central Bank Governor Lois Malkun 
says that senators, especially, are unhappy about the 
admitted necessity of raising taxes, but that if the vote 
comes during the transition period in keeping with the June 
22 pact, they will have some political cover.  Elections both 
for the Senate and the House are less than two years away. 
Congressional leaders have assured us that legislators 
understand the urgency and will consider the proposal 
immediately.  House of Representatives chair Alfredo Pacheco 
told journalists there will be extensive public hearings on 
the measure.  The PLD is concerned that this could mean no 
vote until after the August 16 inauguration. 
 
President Mejia has confirmed several times that he will 
forward the proposal to Congress for consideration, but will 
leave implementation to the next government. Once this week 
he went so far as to say that the proposal would be entirely 
the work of the incoming authorities, not a consensus 
document.  In effect, Fernandez will have to assume the 
paternity of the reform. 
 
Much More to Do 
 
These negotiations within negotiations are driven by the 
commitment with the IMF to deliver the package to Congress by 
the end of July.  That goal is likely to be achieved.  Much 
more must be discussed, calculated, proposed and agreed 
before a revised letter of intention can go to the IMF board 
for approval.  Our optimistic estimate is that with good 
will, luck and guts the new government could get the outlines 
of an agreement with the Fund by November. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Michael Meigs. 
 
3. (U) This report and others in our election and transition 
series can be read on the SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ index.cfm 
along with extensive other current material. 
HERTELL 
"
"18375","7/2/2004 14:41","04SANTODOMINGO3925","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE142165","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 003925 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR L/LEI M. TAYLOR AND W. J. FUENTES, WHA/CAR MCISAAC 
PLEASE PASS TO DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE/OIA - JO MAZUREK. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CJAN, KCRM, DR 
SUBJECT: EXTRADITION CASE OF JOHNNY MARTINEZ 
 
REF: STATE 142165 
 
1.  (U)  Embassy Santo Domingo responds to reftel A questions 
as follows: 
 
a.  Embassy Santo Domingo has no record of receiving any 
request for assurances or any other requests from the GODR 
regarding Johnny Martinez\'s extradition to the United States. 
 
b.  Embassy Santo Domingo has no record of receiving a 
Presidential Decree or similar documentation from the GODR 
prior to or at the time of Johnny Martinez\'s extradition. 
Embassy Santo Domingo notes that fugitives are not extradited 
to the United States unless a Presidential Decree is signed 
authorizing extradition.  Therefore, Embassy Santo Domingo 
was assured that a Presidential Decree had been signed before 
Johnny Martinez left the Dominican Republic. 
 
c.  Embassy Santo Domingo is in possession of a poor quality 
copy of the Presidential Decree authorizing the extradition 
of Johnny Martinez.  Embassy Santo Domingo informally 
requested a copy of the Presidential Decree the week of June 
21, 2004, from the legal office of the GODR Foreign Ministry. 
 The legal office of the GODR Foreign Ministry confirmed that 
it does not hold copies of the Presidential Decrees in 
extradition cases.  The Foreign Ministry legal office 
subsequently delivered a copy of the Decree to Embassy Santo 
Domingo and informed us that it had obtained the copy from a 
clerk in the Presidential Palace. 
 
d.  As a general matter, Embassy Santo Domingo receives 
numerous informal communications from GODR officials after 
submitting an extradition request to the GODR.  Generally 
these communications are in the form of phone calls or 
face-to-face meetings.  As a general matter, the GODR 
acknowledges the receipt of a USG written diplomatic note 
requesting the extradition of a fugitive by return diplomatic 
note.  No other formal diplomatic correspondence is generated 
on extradition cases. 
 
2.  (U)  Johnny Martinez was extradited from the Dominican 
Republic in January 2003.  His case file was retired by the 
Economic and Political section with other working files to 
Washington storage in December 2003, in accordance with 
Department of State procedures. 
HERTELL 
"
"18501","7/7/2004 19:45","04SANTODOMINGO3978","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE145220","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 003978 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DRL/IL ARLEN WILSON; PASS DEPT LABOR FOR ILAB KAREN SOLEM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB, OTRA, DR 
SUBJECT: NOMINATION TO REGIONAL LABOR RIGHTS TRAINING 
SEMINAR 
 
REF: SECSTATE 145220 
 
1. Embassy nominates Jay R. Raman, a political officer with 
labor reporting responsibilities, to attend the WHA Regional 
Labor Rights Training Seminar to be held in Panama City on 
9-10 September 2004. 
 
2. Jay Raman began a one year rotational assignment in the 
Political Section of AmEmb Santo Domingo in July 2004. 
Raman\'s portfolio includes all labor-related reporting, 
including labor standards, worker rights, and child labor 
issues.  This reporting is particularly important due in 
connection with the bilateral free trade agreements with 
Central America and with the the Dominican Republic.  He has 
not received any training specifically related to labor 
reporting.  He can be reached by unclassified email at 
ramanjr@state.gov or by telephone at 809-731-4203. 
 
3. Embassy will cover all per diem, lodging and/or other 
expenses, as requested reftel.  The approximate cost of 
round-trip airfare is USDOLS 975. 
KUBISKE 
"
"18519","7/8/2004 10:51","04SANTODOMINGO3979","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE145167","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 003979 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR AND PM; SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, DR 
SUBJECT: ARTICLE 98 RATIFICATION PROGRESS IN DOMINICAN 
REPUBLIC 
 
REF: STATE 145167 
 
1. The Dominican Senate gave its approval to ratification of 
the Article 98 bilateral agreement on June 15 and forwarded 
the proposal to the lower house of Congress (Chamber of 
Deputies) for action.  The same day, the DCM urged Chamber 
Speaker Alfredo Pacheco (PRD) to ensure prompt approval and 
explained the reasons. 
 
2. Poloff on June 30 met with Chamber foreign relations 
committee chair Dr Cristian Paredes and urged speedy 
ratification, drawing on talking points reftel.  Paredes said 
he \"guaranteed\" that the Article 98 agreement, signed by the 
Dominican Republic on September 13, 2002, would be ratified 
by the lower house before the change of presidential 
administration August 16. 
 
3. Paredes had not yet seen the Article 98 paperwork, so we 
provided copies of the agreement in English and Spanish, 
President Mejia\'s transmission letter to the Congress 
recommending ratification, and a document certifying the 
Senate\'s recent approval.  Paredes said he would track down 
the document that had been forwarded from the Senate to the 
Chamber. 
 
4. Poloff offered to appear at committee hearings (as he had 
done prior to the Senate\'s approval) and to request 
participation by the MFA\'s legal adviser to make the case for 
approval.  Paredes foresaw no objections to the agreement and 
promised to do whatever he could to expedite the ratification. 
 
5. Poloff also spoke briefly with Speaker Pacheco and 
reminded him that the bill was now in the Chamber.  Pacheco 
expressed willingness to move ahead. 
KUBISKE 
"
"18540","7/8/2004 21:31","04SANTODOMINGO4001","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE146518","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004001 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/USOAS, AND WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, KSUM, KCOR, KCRM, KDEM, DR 
SUBJECT: TRANSPARENCY CLAUSE: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
 
REF: STATE 146518 
 
1. Embassy on July 6 delivered talking points on the 
transparency clause (para 8 reftel) to MFA deputy director 
for UN and OAS affairs Rhadys Abreu de Polanco, in the form 
of a non-paper in Spanish.  She undertook to pass the 
document to the Dominican delegation before their July 7 
departure for Managua to attend the July 8-9 Meeting of the 
States Parties to the Inter-American Convention Against 
Corruption. 
KUBISKE 
"
"18560","7/9/2004 11:04","04SANTODOMINGO4006","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 004006 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC AND DRL; NSC FOR SHANNON AND 
MADISON;LABOR FOR ILAB;TREASURY FOR LAMONICA AND OASIA; 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, EFIN, PGOV, PINR, ELAB 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN TRANSITION #6: POLITICS DRIVES WAGE 
DEMANDS 
 
 
1. (SBU) This is no. 6 in our series on the transition to a 
new presidential administration in the Dominican Republic. 
 
POLITICS DRIVES WAGE DEMANDS 
 
 
The grim joke in recent months is that the supermarket has 
become the \"house of horrors,\" especially for the middle 
class.  The double sting of inflation and peso depreciation 
played a central role in the defeat of President Mejia.  Now 
he and the outgoing government are using them to play salary 
politics against the incoming Fernandez administration. 
 
During the campaign, President Mejia promised a modest wage 
and salary hike of 20-25 percent to take effect in January 
2005.  On April 28, less than three weeks before the 
presidential vote, Mejia declared before the American Chamber 
of Commerce that as soon as the tax reform package went into 
effect, the government would raise all wages amd salaries by 
30 percent, with another increase six months later to restore 
the purchasing power of workers. 
 
Now, even as his outgoing administration cooperates on the 
technical level with the PLD drafters of a tax reform 
proposal, Mejia and his supporters are insisting that the 
reform must be accompanied by a 30 percent wage raise. Though 
Mejia promises \"not to change a jot\" in the PLD tax proposal, 
the PRD is likely to put forward legislation at the same time 
on salary levels. 
 
Deciding Wages 
 
Currently, minimum wages are set by negotiation in a salary 
council; public sector wages are published by decree; and 
other private sector salaries are generally adjusted in 
reference to the minimum wage, or not adjusted at all, or, in 
rare cases, through union negotiations. PLD senior advisor 
Temistocles Montas commented to the press last week that 
there are no funds available to finance public sector wage 
increases, and he confirmed that view to us in a private 
meeting June 26.  The president\'s PPH faction of the PRD, 
scenting PLD blood, could legislate a general wage hike as 
the price for approving the Fernandez tax proposal. 
 
Mejia advisor Andy Dauhajre, Jr. asserts that such a wage 
bill could cost the government up to 1 percent of GDP, 
nullifying much of the paltry 2 percent projected yield from 
the PLD\'s current draft tax package. Dauhajre\'s Foundation 
used its weekly page in Listin Diario several weeks ago to 
trumpet \"A Wage Increase is Inevitable.\"  A Congressional 
committee is studying a proposal by the National Committee of 
Labor Unions (CNUS), the country\'s largest labor union, for a 
general 60 percent salary increase. 
 
Salaries and the Slippery Slope 
 
The past year has seen a steady erosion of the purchasing 
power of most Dominican workers and their families.  The cost 
of a basic basket of household goods rose 65 percent in 
nominal pesos in the 12 months to May 2004.  Salaries have 
fallen 40 - 60 percent in real terms during the same period 
(depending on whether the constant unit is pesos or dollars). 
 A negotiated increase of 25 percent in the private sector 
minimum wage in third quarter 2003 was insufficient to offset 
these trends. Mejia allowed government workers only 9 percent 
last December, a tactic that IMF staffers then considered to 
be \"unsustainable\" expenditure restraint. 
 
As the transition teams debate fiscal reform, popular 
pressure for wage increases is building.  The Mejia 
administration, which enjoys strong ties to labor, has not 
faced frequent or prolonged strikes, aside from chronic work 
stoppages by doctors in the public health sector. November 
and January national-wide work stoppages were expressions of 
popular discontent with general economic conditions, not tied 
to any demonstrations or to articulated wage demands. 
Preparations in April for a job action by air traffic 
controllers were forestalled when the government sent in 
military personnel as substitutes for several days. 
 
In contrast, although President-elect Fernandez presided over 
a period of relative economic prosperity during his first 
administration, some 500 localized strikes took place. 
 
How and When? 
 
Legislators and Secretariat of Labor officials agree that 
wages need to be adjusted. They disagree, however, about the 
proper timing, size, and funding of a general increase. 
Fernandez and the PLD have been careful not to make any 
pledges.  A leading PLD-affiliated economist commented in 
private that the peso had become overvalued before the 2003 
crisis and that a smaller adjustment, perhaps of 5 percent, 
would suffice for salaries to return to their trend-line 
level.  Few Dominicans would grasp this macroeconomic 
argument. 
 
Given Dominicans\' strong preference for imported goods, the 
weak peso hurts pocketbooks directly. It is indicative that 
economic commentators and journalists focus on the U.S. 
dollar equivalent of local wages in pesos -- not as an 
indicator of improving national competitiveness but rather to 
emphasize further Dominican nations\' shrinking acquisitive 
power for imports. For the moment, the prospect of a new 
administration has helped stabilize the exchange rate.  If 
confidence in the economy falters for any reason at all, the 
demand for dollars will rise, spurring inflation and 
intensifying the political pressure for an adjustment even as 
the inauguration approaches. 
 
The Challenge to Fernandez 
 
When asked about the need for wage increases, the 
President-elect has suggested that his first priority is 
achieving macroeconomic stability so that the peso can 
recover its value. In a June meeting with the influential 
National Council of Private Enterprise (CONEP), Msgr. Nunez 
is said to have warned against inordinate, excessive wage 
hikes as a danger to recovery, and Fernandez reportedly 
endorsed that view. Private business groups acknowledge the 
pressure to offset purchasing power losses, but they insist 
on moderate, negotiated raises in the minimum wage rather 
than legally mandated general salary increases. 
 
One puzzle to outsiders is why unions and employee 
associations have remained so quiet on this issue.  The only 
aggressive demonstrations have been those of the public 
sector health workers, who are complaining not only about 
salary problems but also about lack of funds for hospital 
supplies, electricity, and equipment, resulting in the 
inability to deliver any reasonable level of public health 
care.  The impressive resilence of ordinary workers and of 
the grumbling middle class may not last too long if the PRD 
decides to rile the long-patience workers. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Clare Ribando, Michael Meigs. 
 
3. (U) This report and others in our election and transition 
series can be read on the SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ index.cfm along 
with extensive other current material. 
KUBISKE 
"
"18568","7/9/2004 14:21","04SANTODOMINGO4014","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","03STATE7094","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004014 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR G/TIP (LINDERMAN), WHA/PPC (FALLS), WHA/CAR 
(MCISAAC) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, KJUS, SMIG, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN SUPREME COURT POSTPONES TRIAL FOR ALIEN 
SMUGGLING 
 
REF: A. 03 STATE 7094 
 
     B. 04 STATE 593 
 
 1. (U) On July 7 the Dominican Supreme Court once again 
postponed trial proceedings for PRD Congressman Guillermo 
Radhames Ramos Garcia, accused of alien smuggling in a July, 
2000 incident.  According to news reports, the chief 
prosecutor asked for a delay in order to issue a summons to 
several key witnesses.  The trial will resume at the Supreme 
Court on 1 September 2004. 
 
2.(SBU) As a result, the case is scheduled to be considered 
after the August 16 inauguration of the Leonel Fernandez 
government.  The President-elect has given no indication of 
his choices for any positions, either at cabinet level or at 
working level.  Embassy will continue to stress with the PLD 
transition working team the need for prompt and effective 
prosecution of cases involving illegal immigration and 
trafficking. 
KUBISKE 
"
"18665","7/13/2004 18:16","04SANTODOMINGO4087","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO3358","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 004087 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR AND WHA 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI; SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN TRANSITION #7: CONGRESS CONTINUES, 
DESPITE DISARRAY 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 3358 
 
1. (SBU) This no. 7 in our series on the transition to a new 
presidential administration in the Dominican Republic: 
 
CONGRESS CONTINUES, DESPITE DISARRAY 
 
When President-elect Leonel Fernandez (PLD) takes office 
August 16, the present National Congress will be only halfway 
through its four-year term. The PRD -- although no longer the 
ruling party -- will continue to dominate both houses of 
Congress, with 29 of 32 senators and the largest block in the 
Chamber of Deputies (72 of 150; compared with the PLD\'s 42 
and the PRSC\'s 36). 
 
Will Fernandez and the PLD secure enough cooperation from 
rivals in Congress to pass urgently needed legislation, 
including especially the IMF-mandated fiscal reform package 
delivered July 12 to the Senate? 
 
The short answer from PLD contacts: \"We had a slimmer 
representation in a PRD-dominated Congress from 1998-2000 
than now, and we succeeded in passing legislation.\"  For 
those two years the PLD had a single senator and 12 
representatives; now they have a single senator and 42 
representatives. 
 
The short answer from the PRD: \"The country is in an economic 
crisis, and we will put aside partisan bickering and work 
together to forge consensus on fiscal reform and other 
measures that are in the national interest.\" 
 
Prospects for passing the tax reform package before July 27 
adjournment are moderately good. At lunch with Treasury Under 
Secretary John Taylor on July 10, Congressional leaders 
 
SIPDIS 
declined to make that promise, but they did expect to 
complete a full round of hearings this session. 
 
Beyond that single piece of vital legislation, prospects are 
much less certain.  Congressional cooperation with the 
executive will depend on house leaders to be chosen August 16 
for the next year.  House of Representatives president 
Alfredo Pacheco (PRD) is unchallenged for a second term and 
has the support of all three major parties.  He is a 
respected, thoughtful, and effective negotiator.  The 
situation in the Senate is more contentious. Current 
president Jesus \"Chu\" Vasquez (PRD), although well regarded 
in civil society for enhancing transparency, has lost the 
support of 20 of the 29 PRD senators -- enough to remove him 
as presiding officer on August 16.  He is likely to be 
replaced. 
 
Vasquez\'s PRD colleagues were \"irritated\" by his sensible, 
non-partisan handling of the \"ley de lemas\" proposal in 
February, when the PRD tried to alter the electoral law in 
support of President Mejia\'s re-election bid.  According to a 
PRD congressman, the Senators also disliked Vasquez\'s 
receptiveness to an audit of the GODR\'s accounting court 
(\"Camara de Cuentas\") following revelations in May by another 
PRD senator of irregularities in the court\'s administration. 
In June a majority of PRD senators voted down the audit.  The 
court has received IDB assistance since 2001 to reform and 
modernize its procedures. 
 
Vasquez\'s successor will be 2001-2003 Senate president Andres 
Bautista, who now chairs the Senate trade committee. 
Bautista has a record of cooperation with the Embassy and is 
close to Mejia.  He was the only senator to attend the July 
10 lunch with Under Secretary Taylor, since most were on a 
trip to Taiwan.  Bautista\'s experience and prominence will be 
an asset in negotiations with the new PLD administration on 
its legislative proposals.  Even so, Bautista has a 
reputation among some PRD lawmakers as being very responsive 
to Mejia and his PPH faction.  The common wisdom is that 
Mejia designated Bautista so as to reinforce his own 
influence in preparation to oppose Fernandez. For now, most 
PRD senators appear ready to continue taking orders from 
Mejia. 
Forging consensus on Fernandez\'s proposals will depend on the 
dynamics of \"cohabitation\" -- and the dynamics between the 
PRD and PRSC, both in opposition.  Discipline could falter 
among PRD and PRSC legislators as their parties regroup from 
their poor showing in the presidential election.  When the 
PRD tried to choose its next whip (vocero) in the Chamber of 
Deputies July 7, one-fourth of the party\'s representatives -- 
including three other contenders for the job -- were absent. 
The PRD convention in November will provide the first full 
test for Mejia. Current Vice President Milagros Ortiz-Bosch 
heads the convention organizing committee; unsuccessful 
vice-presidential candidate Rafael \"Fello\" Subervi (PRD) 
leads the GODR\'s transition team. In his banishment, 
outspokenly anti-reelectionist former PRD president Hatuey De 
Camps retains some influence and media visibility.  All will 
try to loosen the grip of Mejia and his PPH faction. 
 
The PRSC is coming apart.  Reformistas who defected to 
support Fernandez include former Dominican vice presidents 
Jacinto Peynado and Carlos Morales Troncoso and former chief 
executive Donald Reid Cabral.  In early July they published a 
\"communique to the nation\" signed by the \"Provisional 
Presidential Council\" denouncing the current PRSC leaders as 
out of touch with the voters and the times.  They expressed 
their desire to present \"specific proposals to ensure the 
frequent renewal of PRSC leadership\" and \"development of a 
modern democratic party.\"  They praised Fernandez for his 
campaign promise to form \"a government of national unity.\" 
 
Other senior Reformistas including legislators and the 
Estrella group held a \"day of unity and reflection\" June 27, 
and some proposed a party assembly to select new leaders.  On 
July 9 the PRSC Executive Committee postponed the assembly 
until sometime after August 16, on the excuse of reorganizing 
before selecting delegates.  No one knows how many would show 
up at an assembly -- an existing outdated list shows several 
thousand.  No response to the defectors has been agreed. 
Veteran party president Rafael Bello Andino, amid a crescendo 
of criticism of his ineffectiveness, resigned July 11 -- but 
by a vote of 17 to 11, the Executive Committee refused to 
accept his resignation.  For now, Reformista legislators are 
a leaderless lot. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Bainbridge Cowell. 
 
3. (U) This report and others in our election and transition 
series can be read on the SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ index.cfm along 
with extensive other current material.a 
HERTELL 
"
"18888","7/19/2004 18:36","04SANTODOMINGO4200","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE152813","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 004200 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR AND WHA/CCA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/19/2009 
TAGS: PREL, CU, DR 
SUBJECT: REACHING OUT TO GOVERNMENTS AND NGOS ON CUBA: 
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
 
REF: A. (A) STATE 152813 
 
     B. (B) SANTO DOMINGO 2933 
 
Classified By: Acting DCM Mary B. Marshall for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
(C) In part because the Dominican Republic is in a transition 
between governments, the time is not yet right to reach out 
to government and NGOs here for support to Cuban civil 
society. The presidential inauguration is scheduled for 
August 16. 
 
-- The Mejia government (PRD) has been an ally on Cuba but 
has gone into a caretaker mode.  It will not be receptive to 
suggestions for new initiatives. 
 
-- President-elect Fernandez has not named his cabinet.  The 
three-person transition team is working primarily on fiscal 
and IMF matters.  They do not have authority to undertake 
political initiatives at this time. 
 
-- President-elect Leonel Fernandez (PLD) indicated to the 
Ambassador that relations with Cuba would be a relatively low 
priority (Ref B). 
 
-- Ambassador and Embassy will continue to convey U.S. 
position on Cuba with the President-elect. 
 
-- The small number of credible local NGOs in the Dominican 
Republic direct their efforts to domestic issues, including 
the need for transparency and reform of Dominican government 
procedures, fighting corruption, and improving social 
conditions.  These NGOs do not have an adequate international 
focus to undertake campaigns in favor of Cuban civil society. 
HERTELL 
"
"18972","7/21/2004 19:02","04SANTODOMINGO4260","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE152240","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004260 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/ESC/TFS, S/CT, IO/PHO, NSC 
TREASURY FOR JZARATE 
TREASURY/OFAC RNEWCOMB 
WHA/CAR KMCISAAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, EFIN, ETTC, PTER, TD, KTFN 
SUBJECT: TERRORIST FINANCE: CIRA 
 
REF: STATE 152240 
 
1. On July 20, Embassy delivered information in reftel to the 
Vice Secretary in the GODR Ministry of Foreign Affairs and to 
the GODR Superintendent of Banks. Embassy will forward any 
response received. 
HERTELL 
"
"19065","7/23/2004 22:06","04SANTODOMINGO4319","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO3979","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004319 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR-MCISAAC, T-GALLICO, L/PM-COFFEE, 
L/T-ALLDER, PM/SNA-MURRAY 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, MASS, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC RATIFIES ART. 98 BILATERAL 
ACCORD 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 3979 
 
1. (U) As Congressional leaders had assured us (reftel), the 
Dominican Republic on July 22 ratified the bilateral DR-U.S. 
agreement under Article 98 of the International Criminal 
Court treaty.  The Chamber of Deputies plenary approved the 
measure, following the June 15 approval by the Senate 
(reftel).  The accord was signed September 13, 2002. 
 
2. (U) The ratification must now be signed by the President 
-- we anticipate no problem -- and published in the Official 
Gazette within 15 days of signature.  The MFA will then 
initiate an exchange of diplomatic notes to put the agreement 
into effect. 
 
3. (SBU) We do not anticipate any problem arising from the 
change of administrations on August 16, in the event we do 
not receive the diplomatic note before that date. 
President-elect Leonel Fernandez has assured us he will 
comply with all international commitments and obligations of 
the preceding administration. 
HERTELL 
"
"19091","7/26/2004 13:35","04SANTODOMINGO4323","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE148314","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004323 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR OES-DRL/EX ISABEL GATES; DRL/IF SHELLETTE JACKSON; 
WHA/CAR KJMCISAAC, BBACHMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA, PHUM, AORC, DR 
SUBJECT: REGISTRATION FOR JAY R. RAMAN TO HUMAN RIGHTS 
OFFICERS CONFERENCE 28-29 SEPTEMBER 2004 
 
REF: STATE 148314 
 
1.  Embassy registers Jay R. Raman, a political officer with 
human rights reporting responsibilities for Embassy Santo 
Domingo, to attend the Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and 
Labor conference on human rights to be held in Washington on 
28-29 September 2004. 
 
2. Raman is planning to arrive into Washington on 27 
September 2004. He plans to return to post on 30 September 
2004. 
HERTELL 
"
"19153","7/27/2004 18:17","04SANTODOMINGO4350","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004350 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR; WHA/PPC FOR ERIC FALLS; G/TIP FOR RACHEL 
OWEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PHUM, DR 
SUBJECT: EMBASSY PRESENTS TIP ACTION PLAN TO DOMINICAN 
AUTHORITIES 
 
REF: 04 STATE 154834 
 
1. On 23 July 2004 Poloffs met separately with Dominican MFA 
international organizations deputy Rhadys Abreu de Polanco 
and consular affairs director Dulce Rosario de la Maza to 
discuss the TIP issues set forth in reftel and to present the 
Tier 2 Watch List Action Plan for the Dominican Republic. 
 
2.  Both officials were receptive to the talking points and 
action plan and agreed that the Dominican Republic must work 
harder to combat trafficking, noting especially the need to 
enforce existing laws.  They also pledged to brief the 
incoming authorities, who will take office on August 16, on 
the action plan and interim assessment. 
 
3.  COMMENT.  Although the transition to a new government and 
expected turnover of many personnel in the MFA and other 
agencies complicates matters, we believe that both the 
present and incoming administrations are well aware of the 
need for action against trafficking. We will continue to 
press for additional effort and achievements by the GODR in 
accordance with the action plan. END COMMENT. 
HERTELL 
"
"19251","7/29/2004 20:53","04SANTODOMINGO4392","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 004392 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/OMA;NSC FOR SHANNON AND 
MADISON; LABOR FOR ILAB; USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD;TREASURY 
FOR OASIA-LAMONICA;USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN 
BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS 
ITURREGUI; CINCSOUTH ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, EFIN, PGOV 
SUBJECT: TRANSITION #8: DOMINCAN CONGRESS AWASH WITH TAX 
CHANGE PROPOSALS 
 
1. (SBU)  This is number 8 in our series covering the 
transition between the Mejia and the Fernandez governments. 
 
DOMINICAN CONGRESS AWASH WITH TAX CHANGE PROPOSALS 
 
Fifteen days ago President Mejia sent Congress the 
PLD-drafted fiscal package.  The Fernandez team projected its 
proposal would increase revenues by 2.7 percent of GDP 
annually.  The central measure is an increase in the 
value-added tax (ITBIS) from 12 to 16 percent. President 
Mejia has convoked an extraordinary session of Congress in 
order to give more time for the fiscal package, which may be 
passed before August 16 when Leonel Fernandez takes power. 
Members of Congress are actively debating the package with no 
one attempting to block it.  It appears that Mejia and the 
PRD will not actively pursue a salary adjustment via 
legislative action. The consensus opinion is that the package 
is essential to getting the IMF back to the negotiating 
table. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
The Tax Work Continues 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
The Finance Committee of the Dominican House of 
Representatives continues its hearings, both private and 
public, on the tax package drafted by Leonel Fernandez\'s 
transition team and delivered by President Mejia \"without one 
comma changed.\" (Mejia joked to Treasury Under Secretary John 
Taylor on July 10 that he would be \"holding it out with a 
pair of pincers.\")  Congressional and business leaders are 
not in agreement on the shape the fiscal package will take. 
On July 23 the lower house held a hearing on the fiscal 
package with technical advisors from the PRSC, 
representatives of the Entrepreneurs\' Council (CONEP), the 
National Association of Young Businessmen (ANJE) the National 
Association of Banks, the Association of Industrialists,  the 
Association of Private Businesses,  and the Hotel, Bar and 
Restaurant Association. On the PLD delivered proposed 
amendments negotiated with bankers and the private sector. 
PLD fiscal team leader Rafael Camilo indicated that as long 
as the revenue yield is unchanged, they will consider changes 
in broadening the base for the VAT, modifying taxes on rents, 
changing the mechanism for taxes on financial instruments and 
altering the structure of incentives for investment in the 
regions along the border with Haiti.  Finance Committee 
chairman Marino Collante (PRSC) had earlier commented to the 
press that the fiscal package would certainly be amended 
before passage. 
 
Congress busily cleaned up its agenda before the end of the 
regular session on July 27, passing legislation on public 
access to government information, national parks, nepotism in 
government, migration, sales of government owned land, and 
pension rights for Mejia administration employees. On July 22 
it ratified the Article 98 bilateral agreement with the 
United States on the International Criminal Court.  Given the 
evident need for ample consultations and hearings on the tax 
measures, Mejia convoked the legislature into a special 
session that could last up to August 15, the day before the 
presidential inauguration. 
 
- - - - - 
Content 
- - - - - 
 
The PLD\'s package focuses less on \"reform\" than on increasing 
revenues from taxes on consumption.  It does little to alter 
the tax structure of the economy.  Projections of revenue 
gained from taxes on a full-year basis indicate that it will 
not be sufficient to cover the fiscal deficit in the 
government budget, let alone to make a dent in the 
quasi-fiscal deficit of the Central Bank.  The tax package 
focuses on taxes that are easily collected, generally those 
that have a pre-existing mechanism of enforcement.  The 
value-added tax (VAT or ITBIS) would go from 12 percent to 16 
percent, but the base would not be expanded (the Dominican 
Republic has one of the narrowest bases in the region, 
collecting ITBIS on only about 60 percent of sales).  Tax 
increases likely to be passed along to the consumer will be 
those on financial services, alcoholic beverages, tobacco 
products, insurance, airline tickets, telecommunications, 
personal income, advertising, and rents. 
 
Proposed measures facing strong opposition include the 
expansion of the 1 percent tax on real estate generally (both 
personal and business property), not just on high-value 
residences and commercial property (IVSS) valued over RD$ 3 
million or about US$65,000.  Even if passed in some form, 
these measures would be hampered by an insufficient tax 
infrastructure and database for collection.  Taxes on rents 
may be unenforceable.  After consultations between the PLD 
and the Commercial Bank Association the PLD delivered 
proposed amendments that would  replace the proposed 15 
percent tax on interest paid on financial instruments with a 
tax on check clearing, equivalent to 0.15% of the amount 
transferred (this will apply to credit card transacions and 
ATM operations, as well).   The PLD gave in to the bankers 
and agreed to eliminate the proposed mandatory reporting of 
bank transfers to the tax collection authorities, a measure 
that bankers characterized as a violation of bank secrecy 
laws. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Others with the Big Picture 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
At least three local economists or consulting institutions 
have proposed tax overhaul plans that focus on restructuring 
the tax code, but their efforts will have little impact on 
the current fiscal package.  The PRD\'s economic consultant 
Andy Dauhajre, Jr., elaborated a tax reform proposal intended 
to collect taxes principally from the well off, but the PRD 
decision to give carte blanche to the incoming PLD team made 
this a dead letter.  On the expenditure side of the debate, 
Grupo Leon, a power in beer, tobacco and banking, ran 
double-page ads all major papers describing a proposed 
program including reductions in government salaries and other 
state expenditures, continued reform of the banking and 
energy sectors, a tax amnesty applicable to repatriated 
capital and a 20 percent increase in salaries beginning in 
August. Grupo Leon advocates an increase in ITBIS to 16 now 
with commitment to a gradual reduction to a broader 10 
percent ITBIS by 2007.  Much current newspaper commentary 
focuses on the probable incidence of taxes, maintaining that 
most will be paid by the poor and the middle classes. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
Support for the Effort 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
Prominent members of government and the business community 
are putting their support behind the fiscal package, 
acknowledging that some kind of package, however imperfect, 
will be necessary to move toward financial stability and to 
bring the IMF back to the negotiating table.  President of 
the lower house Alfredo Pacheco (PRD) has made public 
statements generally in support of the PLD fiscal package and 
the use of the ITBIS as its main revenue source.  Business 
leader Elena Viyella de Paliza, the president of CONEP (the 
Entrepreneurs\' Council), has asked for a consensus on 
accepting the tax reform. 
 
President Mejia has continued to needle the PLD about a need 
for an early salary increase for public servants, but it 
appears that he and his party are less likely to pursue this 
point through legislative action.  Mejia said nothing about 
salary increases when he had breakfast with Treasury Under 
Secretary Taylor on July. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
- - - - 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
Embassy Santo Domingo expects that the fiscal package may be 
passed before the August 16 inauguration with only minor 
changes and with the support of government and industry 
leaders.  The fiscal plan is only a first step and is so far 
confined to the revenue side of the budget.  The new 
government will need an additional assortment of firm 
corrective measures in hand when it seeks to renew  talks 
with the IMF.  A major question is the approach that 
Fernandez and his team will take to government expenditure. 
The plan does not address persistent problems associated with 
subsidies for cooking gas or electricity, nor does it contain 
any commitments concerning the number of public employees or 
the wages to be paid to them.  PLD commentators to date have 
stressed a \"smaller but better paid public workforce.\"  The 
rush for jobs by PLD supporters will make that difficult to 
achieve. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Mark Kendrick. 
 
3. (U)  This messages and others in our transition and 
elections series are 
available on the SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/  
along with extensive other material. 
HERTELL 
"
"19296","7/30/2004 14:37","04SANTODOMINGO4403","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 004403 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR AND WHA; WHA/PPC FOR ERIC FALLS; DRL FOR 
ARLEN WILSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ELAB, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN DOCTORS STRIKE FOR SALARY INCREASE; 
OTHER SECTORS STANDING BY 
 
1.  SUMMARY.  Public sector physicians and the GODR have 
clashed on wages and hospital conditions, leading to several 
strikes and protests and a continuing reduction of medical 
services, especially for the poor.  Doctors demand better 
salaries and better conditions in the hospitals, while the 
Dominican governent counters that the present state of the 
economy precludes an expenditure of that size.  END SUMMARY. 
 
DOCTORS TAKE TO THE STREETS 
 
2.  The Dominican Medical Association (CMD) represents the 
more than 18,000 doctors and health workers at public sector 
hospitals.  The CMD, led by its president, Dr. Waldo Ariel 
Suero, has adopted aggressive tactics toward the GODR with 
respect to salary and other issues.  Salaries for doctors in 
the public sector currently average between US$300 and $400 
per month, a figure that continues to fall due to high 
inflation.  In real terms in pesos, doctors make less than 
half of what they were earning just five years ago.  Ariel 
Suero is demanding an immediate 40 percent pay raise followed 
by an additional 35 percent raise in 2005. 
 
3.  Hospitals are also seriously affected by the energy 
crisis, which has led to frequent blackouts, and by 
inadequate budgets funded with delays if at all.  There is 
also a shortage of medical equipment, and some patients have 
complained that they have had to purchase their own basic 
supplies in order to receive treatment.  The CMD demands that 
the GODR work to improve the conditions in the hospitals. 
The CMD would have the government pay for these improvements 
by earmarking taxes on alcohol, cigarettes and weapons 
licensing.  In that way, the CMD says, the cost of public 
health will fall on those who can better afford it. 
 
4.  The CMD has undertaken several highly publicized work 
stoppages, during which certain hospitals treat only the most 
critical cases.  The CMD has also arranged several protests 
and marches in a successful attempt to garner press coverage 
and public support.  The CMD has technically been on strike 
since last December, and it has scheduled work stoppages of 
varying length and scope during that time.  In April, when 
President Mejia received a CMD delegation, Ariel Suero agreed 
to suspend strikes until after the May 16 election, 
apparently on the understanding that Mejia would take some 
action after that date.  However, when Mejia received the CMD 
again in mid-July, he was explicit that there was no money in 
the budget for salary increases. 
 
5.  The physicians\' work stoppages, combined with the power 
blackouts and the high cost of electricity and medical 
supplies, have partially paralyzed the public health sector. 
The press has run a series of exposes, articles, and 
photographs about hospital conditions.  The hospitals that 
remain open for emergencies report crowded conditions.  In 
one maternity hospital in Santo Domingo, two or three 
expecting women have to share the same bed.  Many elective 
surgeries have been postponed indefinitely.  Mejia visted a 
Santo Domingo hospital on July 26 with Health Secretary Jose 
Rodrigues Soldevilla in an effort to counteract these 
impressions.  He took the press along as his \"jury\" as he 
visited a dialysis unit and the laboratories, which appeared 
to be functioning normally.  \"The medicines are here 
somewhere, because we paid a mountain of pesos for them,\" 
declared Mejia.  \"These stories are their way of pressing me 
to increase their salaries before the new government gets 
here.  It would be immoral of me to do so - the physicians 
have no right to be treated differently from other 
professionals.\" 
 
MORE WORK STOPPAGES IN THE FUTURE? 
 
6.  The crisis in the medical community will not be resolved 
until well after the new administration takes office on 
August 16.  Last week, an encounter between Soldevilla and 
Ariel Suero at a hospital nearly degenerated into fisticuffs. 
 There is no longer any dialogue between the two sides. 
 
7. The PLD party of president-elect Leonel Fernandez has been 
much more conciliatory towards the CMD, calling for dialogue 
and consensus and an end to disruptions of medical services. 
Fernandez\'s word carries some weight, as the last pay raise 
for doctors was in 1999, during his first administration 
(1996-2000).  Even so, the 1999 pay raise was achieved after 
a series of smaller the CMD strikes, and because of this 
previous success it is unlikely that the CMD will abandon 
this tactic when Fernandez takes office.  Rather, the CMD 
told poloff it will continue periodic work stoppages in order 
to maintain momentum and encourage Fernandez to address the 
issue quickly.  Ariel Suero informed poloff that the CMD is 
willing to give Fernandez until next February to commit to a 
salary increase before taking more drastic action. 
 
8.  In public the CMD has said that it is considering a 
nationwide walkout, which would leave responsibility of 
public health to the approximately 2,400 military doctors, 
who would be quickly overwhelmed.  This is probably just a 
negotiating ploy, and there is no indication that the CMD 
would actually take such a drastic step. 
 
OTHER SECTORS WAIT QUIETLY... FOR NOW 
 
9.  While the CMD is making news, other labor organizations 
that have also demanded salary increases are impatiently 
though quietly awaiting the arrival of the new 
administration.  Fernandez has said that an increase in the 
minimum wage will not be feasible until the economy 
stabilizes; unless inflation is controlled, he has told labor 
leaders publicly, a wage hike will be meaningless.  Trade 
unions differ and would like to see an immediate increase. 
However, the unions recognize that little can be achieved in 
the last days of the Mejia administration and they are 
willing to give Fernandez time to implement his strategy. 
 
10.  Labor organizations\' respect for Fernandez is bolstered 
by the presence of vice president-elect, Rafael Alburquerque, 
a former minister of labor who is well liked in labor 
circles.  Last week, Maribel Batista Matos, lawyer for the 
National Concil of Unions (CNUS), told poloff that there was 
\"hope\" that salaries would improve under the Fernandez 
administration.  Nonetheless, if Fernandez does not move 
promptly to placate the unions, which may be difficult with a 
Congress that is heavily balanced towards the opposition, it 
is likely that the labor strife in the public hospitals will 
spread to other sectors of society by the end of the year. 
 
11.  Drafted by Jay Raman. 
HERTELL 
"
"19313","7/30/2004 20:42","04SANTODOMINGO4418","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE141379","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 SANTO DOMINGO 004418 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC,DRL:AWILSON,EB, 
EB/CBA,EB/IFD/OIA AND EB/IFD/OIA/ATBRYAN 
STATE PASS TO USTR; TREASURY FOR OASIA:LLAMONICA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, ECON, KIDE, EINV, EFIN, ELAB, KTDB, PGOV 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: 2004 INVESTMENT CLIMATE MID 
YEAR UPDATE 
 
REF: STATE 141379 
 
1. This cable provides the 2004 Investment Climate Mid Year 
Update for the Dominican Republic tasked reftel 
 
2. (begin text) 
 
CHAPTER 7: Investment Climate 
 
Investment Climate 
 
The following is the (preliminary) 2005 Investment Climate 
Report for the Dominican Republic.(as of July 2004) 
 
A.1.  Openness to foreign investment 
 
The Dominican government welcomes foreign investment. 
However, some laws exist that apply to specific sectors of 
the economy (e.g., insurance) that may discriminate between 
domestic and foreign investments.  Regulations implementing 
the 1995 foreign investment law were enacted in September 
1996. 
 
Under the Foreign Investment Law (No. 16-95), unlimited 
foreign investment is permitted in all sectors, with the 
exception of the disposal and storage of toxic, hazardous or 
radioactive waste not produced in the country; activities 
negatively impacting public health and the environment of the 
country; and production of materials and equipment directly 
linked to national security without authorization from the 
president.  There are no limits on foreign control, or 
screening of foreign investment in the open sectors.  Foreign 
investors have fully participated at every stage in the 
capitalization of state enterprises such as the electric 
company, airport management and sugar mills.  In 1997, the 
government also established the Office for Investment 
Promotion (OPI), which has proven to be an important contact 
for potential investors. 
 
In 2003, foreign direct investment in the Dominican Republic 
was $607 million dollars less than in 2002, according to 
preliminary data available from the Central Bank. United 
States investment shrank to $214.8 million dollars, according 
to the same preliminary data. 
 
A.2.  Conversion and Transfer Policies 
 
The Dominican exchange system is divided between the private 
sector, controlled by commercial banks and exchange houses, 
and the public sector, operated by the Central Bank.  A 
private sector exchange rate system exists for most 
commercial bank transactions.  The Central Bank uses the 
average of the market-determined rate of exchange to set its 
own rate for operations, such as selling foreign currency to 
the government to pay foreign debt or purchasing currency 
from those economic entities required to exchange their 
currency.  In addition, the Central Bank purchases foreign 
currency from the market.  Importers may obtain hard currency 
directly from commercial banks and exchange houses, as well 
as from the Central Bank.  Foreign currency generated from 
international credit card companies, international telephone 
traffic, public sector loan payments, and the sale of oil to 
foreign flagged carriers must be exchanged at the Central 
Bank. 
 
A.3. Expropriation and Compensation 
 
Dominican expropriation standards have historically been at 
variance with international norms.  A number of U.S. 
investors have outstanding disputes with the Dominican 
government concerning expropriated land.  Property claims 
make up the majority of expropriation cases.  Most, but not 
all seizures have been for purposes of infrastructure, or 
commercial development.  In some cases, claims have existed 
for many years.  Investors and lenders often do not receive 
prompt or adequate payment for their losses, and payment has 
been difficult to obtain even when a Dominican court has 
ordered compensation or the government has recognized a claim. 
 
The most recent Dominican governments have expropriated fewer 
properties than their predecessors and have generally paid 
compensation in those cases.  A law passed in 1999 authorized 
the issuance of bonds to settle claims against the Dominican 
government that arose prior to August 16, 1996, including 
claims for expropriated property.  The Mejia administration 
is working with a USAID-sponsored expert to resolve 
outstanding claims.  The United States Government is 
presently aware of 13 claims of US persons that may be 
outstanding against the Dominican government, down from 22 
claims a year ago. 
 
The GODR has not entirely resolved arrears owed to several 
independent power producers (IPPs) in connection with the 
partial privatization of the energy sector and faces 
additional difficulty meeting payment obligations in the 
short term.  This has contributed to cash flow and credit 
problems for the IPPs and widespread sporadic blackouts. 
While the GODR has made some partial payments, significant 
arrears remain outstanding and are a cause of ongoing 
concern.  The 2002 \"Madrid Agreement\" between the government 
and most IPPS stipulated that participating IPPs would lower 
electricity tariffs, if the government made a large one-time 
payment. The government has not been able to secure financing 
to put this change into effect. 
 
A.4. Dispute Settlement 
 
The Dominican Republic is a civil law country.  A number of 
U.S. investors, ranging from large firms to private 
individuals, have payment-related, expropriation, or 
contractual disputes with the Dominican government and its 
government-owned enterprises.  Both free trade zone and 
non-free trade zone companies face dispute resolution 
problems.  U.S. firms, obliged to respect the U.S. Foreign 
Corrupt Practices Act, have had particular difficulty 
accessing justice within the Dominican system and defending 
their interests in court.  Recent judicial reforms have 
somewhat improved the administration of justice in the 
country, but judicial procedures are of uneven quality.  In 
mid-2003, the Senate passed a law creating a special, 
independent, anti-corruption prosecutor with national 
jurisdiction.   Also in 2003, the government passed a law 
reforming the process for hiring prosecutors and making them 
less susceptible to political influence.  In 2002, the 
government passed a new penal process code that defines legal 
judicial procedures and makes them more transparent. 
Nevertheless, the judicial system is often unable to enforce 
decisions in favor of foreign investors. 
 
In April 2002, the Dominican Republic became a member of the 
International Center for the Settlement of Investment 
Disputes (\"ICSID,\" also known as the \"Washington 
Convention\").  In August 2002, the Dominican Republic 
ratified the 1958 New York Convention on Arbitral Awards, 
thereby recognizing the right of companies to pursue 
international arbitration.  The Embassy estimates the total 
value of U.S. investor claims as at least US $500 million, 
much of which is owed to energy sector companies. 
 
A.5.  Performance Requirements/Incentives 
 
There are no special investment incentives or other types of 
favored treatment given to foreign investors, nor are there 
requirements for investors to export a certain percentage of 
their production.  Foreign companies are unrestricted in 
their access to foreign exchange.  Law 69 requires local 
sourcing when components are of approximately equal cost and 
quality compared to imports, but this law has not appeared to 
hinder investors.  In addition, there are no requirements 
that foreign equity be reduced over time or that technology 
be transferred according to certain terms.  The government 
imposes no location, local ownership, local content, or 
export requirements or conditions on foreign investors.  The 
Dominican labor code establishes that 80 percent of the labor 
force of a foreign company, including free trade zone 
companies, be composed of Dominican nationals (although the 
management or administrative staff of a foreign company is 
exempt from this regulation). The Foreign Investment Law 
provides that licensing contracts for the use of patents or 
trademarks, the leasing of machinery and equipment, and the 
provision of technical know-how must be registered with the 
Central Bank\'s Directorate of Foreign Investment. 
A.6.  Right to Private Ownership and Establishment 
The Dominican Constitution guarantees the freedom to own 
private property and to establish businesses.  The Foreign 
Investment Law grants foreign investors the same rights as 
domestic investors.  Public enterprises are not given 
preference over private enterprises. 
 
A.7.  Property Rights 
 
Secured interests in both movable and real property are 
recognized and generally respected.  Mortgages on real 
property must be registered in the Registry of Titles where 
the property is located.  Real property rights registered 
under the Dominican Republic\'s Torrens system of real 
property registration are binding on third parties. 
Provision in the law is also made for registration of liens 
on personal property.  Some United States citizens have 
reported problems with fraudulent deeds or claims against 
their properties and difficulties enforcing property rights. 
 
Protection of intellectual property rights has improved in 
recent years, but is notably deficient in some areas.  In 
2003, the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative changed the 
Dominican Republic\'s status from \"Section 301 Priority Watch 
List,\" (where it had been from 1998 through 2002), to 
\"Section 301 Watch List.\"  Pirated software, video and audio 
recordings, as well as unauthorized broadcast and 
distribution of copyrighted material remain concerns despite 
increased government efforts to crack down on these 
violations.  In March 2003, the GODR made regulatory changes 
to the patent law that appears to bring the law into 
compliance with TRIPS. 
 
A.8.  Transparency of the Regulatory System 
 
During the last few years, the Dominican government has 
carried out a major reform effort aimed at improving the 
transparency and effectiveness of laws affecting competition. 
 
 
On November 20, 2002, Congress passed the Financial Monetary 
Law (Law 183-02) to regulate banks and other key players in 
the financial sector.  The 2003 IMF standby agreement, which 
is not currently in effect, requires additional regulation 
and supervision of the banking sector.  The primary sections 
of the Market Regulation Code have all been approved, 
including legislation in critical areas of the patent and 
trademark law, telecommunications, copyright, and trade 
practices and safeguards.  The lone exception is in the area 
of consumer protection.  As in many developing countries, 
however, red tape and differences between law and actual 
practice are problems.  Enforcement efforts are sporadic. 
 
A.9.  Efficient Capital Markets and Portfolio Investment 
 
Despite strong GDP growth and largely successful reform 
efforts that, until 2003, combined to produce a relatively 
healthy financial sector, Dominican authorities failed to 
detect years of large-scale fraud and mismanagement at 
Baninter, the country,s third largest bank.  Failure of 
Baninter and two other banks cost the GODR in excess of $3 
billion dollars, severely destabilized the country,s 
finances and shook business confidence.  Inflation in nominal 
terms was approximately 30 percent over the first six months 
of 2004 and is likely to reach 40 percent for 2004. 
 
The Dominican stock market, the Bolsa de Valores de Santo 
Domingo, was founded in 1991.  Since beginning operations, 
the Bolsa has handled initial offerings of commercial paper. 
The private sector has access to a variety of credit 
instruments.  Foreign investors are able to obtain credit on 
the local market, but tend to prefer less expensive offshore 
sources.  There are 14 multi-service banks, 15 development 
banks, 18 savings and loan associations, 1 mortgage bank, 69 
finance companies, 23 loan houses, and 1 national housing 
bank.  Portfolio investment grew 370.5 percent in 2003 - an 
increase largely explained by the issuance of Central Bank 
certificates to compensate depositors in failed banks.  Other 
CentralBank certificates have been placed with financial 
entities and individuals at high interest rates to reduce the 
monetary base.  Fixed assets grew 11.4 percent, while other 
assets -- such as confiscated assets, deferred credits, 
deferred taxes, and anticipated payments -- increased 51.5 
percent. 
 
 
A.10.  Political Violence 
 
There have been sporadic outbreaks of protest in some of the 
poorer areas of the Dominican Republic over spiraling 
electricity costs and lengthy rolling blackouts.  The murder 
of PRD Senator Dario Gomez in 2001, a chief architect of the 
Dominican legislation against money laundering, has not been 
resolved.  Occasional labor protests are generally peaceful. 
In November 2003 and January 2004 a coalition of 
organizations sponsored successful national work stoppages in 
protest to economic conditions. 
 
A.11 Corruption 
 
Corruption remains a pervasive problem in government and 
within law enforcement agencies nationwide.  Corruption and 
the need for reform efforts are openly and widely discussed. 
 
B.  Bilateral Investment Agreements and Tax Agreements 
 
In March 2004, the Dominican Republic completed negotiating a 
comprehensive free trade agreement with the United States, 
which will associate the country with the Central American 
Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA).  As of July 1, 2004, the 
agreement had not been signed. The Dominican Republic has a 
Bilateral Investment Treaty with Spain and numerous bilateral 
trade agreements with Central American countries, but these 
do not provide the level of protection to investors generally 
offered by U.S. bilateral investment treaties.  An Agreement 
for the Exchange of Tax Information between the United States 
and Dominican Republic has been in effect since 1989. 
 
C.  OPIC and other Investment Insurance Programs 
 
The Overseas Private Investment Corporation has been active 
in the Dominican Republic with both insurance and loan 
programs.  The Dominican government is a party to the 
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) Agreement. 
 
D.  Labor 
 
The Dominican Constitution provides for the right of workers 
to strike (and for private sector employers to lock out 
workers).  The Dominican Labor Code, which became law in June 
1992, is a comprehensive piece of legislation which 
establishes policies and procedures for many aspects of 
employer/employee relationships, ranging from minimum wage 
levels, hours of work, overtime and vacation pay, to 
severance pay, causes for termination, and union 
registration.  The labor code also requires that 80 percent 
of non-management workers of a company be Dominican 
nationals.  The standard workweek is 44 hours.  Most jobs pay 
salaries based on the minimum wage.  Some labor shortages 
exist in professions requiring lengthy education or technical 
certification. 
 
An ample labor supply is available, although there is a 
scarcity of skilled workers and technical supervisors.  Most 
employers have found the local work force competent, 
trainable, and cooperative.  Foreign employers are not 
singled out when labor complaints are made.  About 10 percent 
of the nation\'s work force is unionized.  The labor code 
specifies that 20 percent or more workers in a company may 
form a union.  Before a union may enter into a collective 
bargaining agreement or officially call a strike, however, it 
must have the support of an absolute majority of all company 
workers, whether unionized or not; have previously attempted 
to resolve the conflict through mediation; provided written 
notification to the Ministry of Labor of the intent to 
strike; and waited 10 days from that notification before 
striking.  Due to these stringent requirements, brief work 
stoppages are more common than lengthy strikes.  For example, 
early in 2003, members of several major transportation unions 
briefly walked off the job to protest the rising cost of fuel. 
Collective bargaining is legal and may take place in firms in 
which a union has gained the support of an absolute majority 
of the workers.  Very few companies have collective 
bargaining pacts.  The Dominican labor code stipulates that 
workers cannot be dismissed because of trade union membership 
or union activities; however, in practice, it appears workers 
are sometimes fired because of union activities.   The 
Dominican labor code establishes a system of labor courts for 
dealing with disputes.  While cases do make their way through 
the labor courts, enforcement of judgments is not 100 percent 
reliable. 
 
Many of the major manufacturers in the free trade zones 
(FTZs) have voluntary \"codes of conduct\" that include 
workers, rights protection clauses, but it is not clear 
whether these incorporate the ILO,s Fundamental Principles 
and Rights at Work.  In general, workers are rarely familiar 
with such codes or the principles they set out, and no 
independent monitoring system exists to ensure that these 
codes are respected. 
 
E.  Foreign Trade Zones/Free Ports 
 
The Dominican Republic\'s free trade zones (FTZs) are 
regulated by Law 8-90, which provides for 100 percent 
exemption from all taxes, duties, charges and fees affecting 
production and export activities in the zones.  These 
incentives are for 25 years for zones located near the 
Dominican-Haitian border, and 15 years for those located 
throughout the rest of the country.  This legislation is 
managed by the Free Trade Zone National Council (CNZF), a 
joint private sector/government body which, among its other 
powers, has discretionary authority to extend the time limits 
on these incentives. 
 
Hard currency flows from the free trade zones are handled via 
the free foreign exchange market.  Foreign and Dominican 
firms are afforded the same investment opportunities both by 
law and in practice. The CNZF\'s Annual Statistical Report for 
2002 noted a Free Zone Sector with a total of 53 free zone 
parks and 520 operating companies.  Of those companies, 254, 
or 49 percent are from the United States.  The total 
cumulative investment in Free Trade Zones is approximately 
US$ 1.3 billion at year-end 2003, of which nearly 74 percent 
represents foreign investment.  Over 61.3 percent of foreign 
investment came from the U.S., followed by companies 
registered in Korea, Netherlands, and Switzerland.  In 
general, firms operating in the free trade zones experience 
far fewer bureaucratic and legal problems than do firms 
operating outside the zones. 
 
  Exporters/investors seeking further information from the 
CNZF may contact: 
 
Consejo Nacional de Zonas Francas 
Leopoldo Navarro No. 61 
Edif.  San Rafael, piso no. 5 
Santo Domingo, D.R. 
Phone: (809) 686-8077 
Fax: (809) 686-8079 and 688-0236 
Web-site Address:  www.cnzfe.gov.do 
 
F.  Foreign Direct Investment Statistics 
 
Foreign direct investment in the last few years has been 
largely concentrated in tourism, free trade zone activity, 
electricity generation and communications.  The Dominican 
government has made a concerted effort to attract new 
investment, taking advantage of the new foreign investment 
law and of the country\'s natural and human resources. The 
decision to privatize or \"capitalize\" ailing state 
enterprises (electricity, airport management, sugar) has 
attracted substantial foreign capital to these sectors. 
 
Foreign Investment Data (US$ millions) 
Central Bank of the Dominican Republic 
2003 Numbers 
FDI Stocks 7520.4 
FDI Stock /GDP 45.0% 
FDI Flows 310.0 
*  Preliminary data from the Central Bank 
 
FDI flows by source country 
YEAR 2003* (in millions) 
United States 214.8 
Canada 170.0 
Spain -300.8 
UK -0.2 
France 51.5 
Netherlands 70.0 
Italy 15.2 
Bahamas 8.9 
Colombia 32.6 
Others 48 
Total 310.0 
*  Preliminary Data for 2003, from the Central Bank of the 
Dominican Republic 
 
 
FDI by Sector 
2003* 
Tourism 163.2 
Trade 12.4 
Communications 184.9 
Electricity -241.5 
Finance 86.3 
Free Zones 56.1 
Others 48.5 
Total 310.0 
 
Major Foreign Investors: 
 
Following are some of the largest companies registered as 
foreign businesses by the Central Bank of the Dominican 
Republic: 
 
1. Compania Dominicana de Telefonos (CODETEL) owned by 
Verizon (U.S.): the main telephone service provider, which 
has operated in the Dominican Republic for more than 70 
years.  In 2004 the firm changed its name in the Dominican 
Republic to Verizon, 
 
2.  Central Romana Corporation (U.S.): A diversified 
operation that includes a hotel, sugar plantations, a mill 
and real estate businesses, among other activities. 
 
3.  E. Leon Jimenes, C. por A. (a local partner of Phillip 
Morris, of the U.S.): this company produces cigarettes, 
cigars and beer. 
 
4.  Falconbridge Dominicana (Canada): produces ferro nickel 
for mining export in the Dominican Republic. 
 
5.  Shell Company (Netherlands/England): shares ownership 
with the Dominican government of the only petroleum refinery 
in the country (50% each) and is a distributor of petroleum 
by-products. 
 
6.  Citibank (U.S.): the bank has operated in the Dominican 
Republic for many years. 
 
7.  Esso Standard Oil (U.S.): Esso is a long-time distributor 
of petroleum by-products. 
 
8.  Texaco Caribbean (U.S.): Another long-time distributor of 
petroleum by-products. 
 
9.    Colgate Palmolive, Inc. (U.S.): a leading manufacturer 
in the Dominican Republic of soaps and toothpaste. 
 
10.  Bank of Nova Scotia (Canada): One of the oldest foreign 
commercial banks in the Dominican Republic.  Known as 
Scotiabank. 
 
11.  AES (U.S.): Through local subsidiaries, AES operates the 
electricity distribution network in the eastern half of the 
country, as well as electricity generation plants. 
 
12.  Prisma Energy (U.S.): In partnership with other 
companies, operates an electricity generating plant Puerto 
Plata. 
13.  Coastal (U.S.): A major investor in electricity 
generation. 
 
14.  Seaboard (U.S.): A major investor in electricity 
generation. 
 
15.  Tricom (40% owned by Motorola - U.S.): Second largest 
provider of long distance and cellular telephone services in 
the Dominican Republic. 
 
16.  Cogentrix (U.S.) An independent power producer with 300 
MW capacity. 
 
 
 
 
 
HERTELL 
"
"19314","7/30/2004 21:44","04SANTODOMINGO4421","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 004421 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/OMA; 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON; 
LABOR FOR ILAB; USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD;TREASURY FOR 
OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: TRANSITION #9 - DOMINICAN ELECTRICITY: NO ONE\'S 
RESPONSIBLE, EVERYONE SUFFERS 
 
1.    (SBU) This is number 9 in our series covering the 
transition between the Mejia and the Fernandez governments. 
 
ELECTRICITY: NO ONE\'S RESPONSIBLE, EVERYONE SUFFERS 
 
The slow-motion collapse of the electricity sector during the 
countdown to the August 16 presidential election has finally 
reached a stage where frustration in the barrios exceeds the 
hopes offered by the prospect of a new administration.  The 
sporadic neighborhood outbreaks of rock throwing, gunshots 
into the air and tire-burning to protest blackouts extended 
at least twice during this past week to the auto route 
connecting the capital with \"Las Americas\" airport and other 
points east.  Neighborhoods along the road had been without 
electricity for 72 hours.  No one has been killed yet, but 
police report three injured and a number of arrests. 
 
President Meja, in off-the-cuff comments to the press corps, 
says that the electricity problem will have to be solved by 
the incoming administration.  At this point the Dominican 
electric system is bankrupt. Finance Secretary Calderon is on 
the record stating that the government owes nothing to the 
generators.  Electricity Council head George Reinoso says the 
government owes no more than $18 million -- and Mejia 
announced on July 29 that this amount was being disbursed for 
fuel purchases for generators.  All agree that accumulated 
debts to entities in the sector exceed $400 million. The 
government has been the only shareholder in two of the three 
major distribution companies since last November, when it 
bought out Spanish interests. 
 
In June PLD economist Julio Ortega commented to the DCM in 
passing that the crisis in the electricity sector \"already 
happened, three months ago, and will need a lot of work.\" 
Leonel Fernandez is not making any promises.  Leaders in the 
sector have taken a road show to the IMF, to Treasury, and to 
others, advocating a restructuring, but no one has found any 
additional financing, domestic or international, to keep the 
lights on. 
 
And the lights are progressively going out.  Peak demand in 
the Dominican Republic is about 1600 megawatts.  After the 
May 16 election, the electricity on-line fell to around 1100 
megawatts, and then dropped in late June and early July to 
around 800 megawatts.  Last week (July 18-24) it dropped 
further, falling below 600 megawatts.  The system is back up 
to the mid-800\'s this week, but wide regions of the north 
went dark starting on July 27 when the Smith-Enron plant ran 
out of fuel.  (Calderon\'s comment: \"We paid them $3 million 
last Friday.\")  The country has about 3000 megawatts of 
installed capacity, though about one-third of that is 
inefficient and would be idle if the system were fully 
functioning. 
 
The violence along the airport highway was only the most 
visible evidence of the discontent caused by this financial 
failure of capacity.  Outside the capital, some regions or 
towns have regularly been without power for 16 hours or more; 
at the current low levels of service the distribution 
companies are now shutting off swathes of Santo Domingo, as 
well, often for lengthy periods.  Traffic lights frequently 
do not work; many businesses cannot function; sales of frozen 
foods have dropped by 80 percent since consumers doubt store 
refrigeration and can,t be sure of storing goods at home. 
Without power, household fans do not work and many in the 
barrios have difficulty getting to sleep.  The diesel-run 
generators in ubiquitous use at commercial properties and 
apartment buildings are in service for such lengthy periods 
that they are overheating and breaking down.  Electricians 
and generator repair personnel are busy, as are the 
installers of \"inverters\" - - contraptions linking 4 to 8 
heavy-duty car batteries to provide current when all other 
services go down. 
 
The beach resorts far from the capital feel few effects, for 
they are self-sufficient in generating power - - in fact, 
they have a sideline in selling power to distributors in the 
\"spot market.\" 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Better?  No Time Soon 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
The electricity sector consists of a variety of large plants 
of different capacities, owned by different interests and 
fueled variously by gas, coal, diesel and hydropower.  The 
Fernandez government of 1996-2000 \"capitalized\" the three big 
distribution companies (EDESTE, EDENORTE and EDESUR, serving 
the east, north and south respectively) but sold only 50 
percent of the shares.  Mejia justifies his November 2003 
decision to buy back the shares of EDENORTE and EDESUR from 
Spanish firm Union Fenosa (UF), asserting that UF management 
failed to collect on time, borrowed from UF Spain at usurious 
rates and was deceiving the government.  U.S.-owned firm AES 
operates EDESTE but made a corporate decision in December 
2003 to divest itself of shares and management whenever it 
can - - thereby earning the rancor of the regulatory 
authorities.  On July 28 AES brought to call on the 
Ambassador two executives from the California-based \"Trust 
Company of the West,\" specialists in acquisition of high-risk 
energy assets.  AES expects to sell to them but to remain for 
the time being as administrator of EDESTE.  Mejia named a 
commission in late 2003, which included in its terms of 
reference, a mandate to advise him on legal requirements for 
privatization of distributors, including private sector 
purchases of up to 75 percent of shares. Their report 
advocating divestiture was delivered in June but did not get 
into the papers until early this week.  And the Mejia 
government has made no move in that direction. 
 
Plants are idle for various reasons.  The sector is choked 
with debt and firms have exhausted reserves of working 
capital.  Suppliers of fuel no longer extend credit but 
instead demand cash ten days before delivery. Some 40 percent 
of electricity consumption is unpaid, either because the 
power is tapped without meters or because distribution 
companies fail to sanction non-payment.  The monthly sector 
deficit is around $25 million, not including subsidies. The 
Mejia government,s policy of subsidizing electricity and 
cooking gas consumption, intended to protect the poorest 
households, continues despite the government,s clear 
inability to pay - - the government spent in six months the 
full amount budgeted for electricity subsidies for all of 
2004.  It is unclear how much of the monthly $25 million 
deficit the government is currently managing to pay. Some of 
the plants are under repair and some of this downtime may be 
at managerial discretion, awaiting the change of government. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
A New Administration Is Not A Clean Slate 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
Pessimists such as outgoing Technical Secretary Carlos 
Despradel think that the street protests will get steadily 
worse, especially as the population understands that the new 
administration has no quick fix  or \"purple magic,\" to use 
Mejia,s grim rebuke in the February 27 state of the nation 
address.   We know that the PLD transition team has been 
seeking an approach to subsidies on cooking gas but they have 
shown no similar devotion to a fix for the electricity sector. 
 
-   Fernandez may surprise us by pulling out of his hat a new 
pact with Venezuela on petroleum sales. President Hugo Chavez 
could easily direct national oil company PDVSA to offer 
90-day terms on fuel sales for electricity generation.  Such 
a deal would be a big but one-time boost for Fernandez,s 
first hundred days. 
 
-   Getting IMF board approval with a revised standby will 
open the avenue for lending for the electricity sector by the 
World Bank,  including a $25 million tranche that the Mejia 
government never collected because officials couldn,t 
adequately document their spending of a March disbursement. 
Bargaining with the IMF is going to be tough, but everyone in 
Santo Domingo knows that any road to recovery has to go 
through an IMF agreement. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Looking Down The Tunnel 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
As frustration spreads in the barrios and even citizens in 
middle class neighborhoods like the Naco and Piantini areas 
of Santo Domingo organize demonstrations against the 
blackouts, expectations of the new government are rising. 
But as things stand, Fernandez and his administration are not 
going to be able to pay the debts and to inject fresh 
liquidity into the system.  Even if the new president pulls 
out of his hat  generous fuel concessions from Venezuela or 
an unexpectedly comprehensive financial and budget fix, the 
solution will take time. Over the last six months electricity 
industry participants worked together in seminars sponsored 
by USAID and arrived at a general agreement on an approach 
that includes raising rates, divesting the government of most 
or all of its holdings in  the industry and lowering 
subsidies while targeting them better.  The fact remains that 
the electric system needs a lot of money to put an end to 
blackouts. We are looking down a tunnel with not much 
prospect for light at the end of it.  And not even that 
glimmer will be visible unless major changes are made to the 
payment structure of the electric system and the Fernandez 
administration moves quickly to bring the IMF back to the 
table. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Mark Kendrick, Michael Meigs. 
 
3. (U) This report and others in our transition and election 
series are available on our SIPRNET site 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/  
along with extensive other material. 
HERTELL 
"
"19323","8/1/2004 19:37","04SANTODOMINGO4422","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE152009","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004422 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR WHA/CAR AND IO/UNP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, ECON, PHUM, KDEM, AORC, DR 
SUBJECT: U.S. INITIATIVES FOR THE 59TH UNGA DELIVERED TO 
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
 
REF: STATE 152009 
 
(SBU) On July 23, Embassy delivered talking points (reftel), 
in Spanish translation provided by Department, on U.S. 
initiatives for the 59th UN General Assembly to MFA deputy 
director for international organization affairs Rhadys Abreu 
de Polanco, and urged Dominican support for them.  She 
undertook to pass the information (in the form of a 
non-paper) to the incoming authorities at the MFA who will 
take office following the August 16 inauguration of 
Presdident-elect Leonel Fernandez.  She explained that it 
would be up to the new administration to determine the 
Dominican Republic\'s position on these initiatives and to 
develop any Dominican proposals to table in the UNGA. 
HERTELL 
"
"19343","8/2/2004 13:07","04SANTODOMINGO4425","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE161883","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004425 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KNNP, TRGY, PTER, AORC, DR 
SUBJECT: INVITATION TO GTRI CONFERENCE IN VIENNA DELIVERED 
TO DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
 
REF: STATE 161883 
 
1.  Embassy on July 29 delivered reftel talking points 
inviting the Dominican Republic to participate in the Global 
Threat Reduction Initiative Partners Conference in Vienna, 
Austria, September 18-19, and text of proposed joint 
statement, to MFA international organizations deputy director 
Rhadys Abreu de Polanco.  She undertook to pass the 
information (provided as a non-paper) to the incoming 
authorities at the MFA who will take office following the 
August 16 inauguration of Presdident-elect Leonel Fernandez. 
It will be up to the new administration to determine whether 
the Dominican Republic will attend the meeting. 
HERTELL 
"
"19436","8/4/2004 17:15","04SANTODOMINGO4501","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 004501 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADINSON 
TREASURY FOR OASIA AND LAMONICA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/05/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EFIN, EINV, ENRG, MCAP, DR 
SUBJECT: TRANSITION #10 - THE AMBASSADOR MEETS WITH LEONEL 
FERNANDEZ 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Hans H. Hertell, reasons 1.4 (b) & (d). 
 
1.  (U)  This is cable number 10 in our series covering the 
transition between the Mejia and Fernandez governments. 
 
President-elect Fernandez - Two weeks from power 
 
2.  (C)  Summary.  President-elect Leonel Fernandez told the 
Ambassador in a private meeting on August 3, 2004, that his 
government will renegotiate the IMF agreement, will receive a 
total of US $750 million in assistance from Spanish hotel 
owners and the government of Venezuela, will work to fight 
corruption and will look for guidance in its efforts to 
right-size the Dominican military.  End summary. 
 
------------------- 
Economy and Energy 
------------------- 
 
3.  (C)  President-elect Leonel Fernandez told the Ambassador 
on August 3, 2004, that he plans to renegotiate the GODR 
agreement with the IMF as soon as practicable after taking 
office on August 16.  Fernandez was critical of President 
Mejia and his handling of the economic crisis and the failure 
of the PRD-led government to comply with the terms of the 
current IMF agreement.  Fernandez told the Ambassador that he 
plans to travel to Washington soon after his inauguration to 
meet with the IMF and USG officials. 
 
4.  (C)  In order to provide capital to the country, 
Fernandez has negotiated with hotel developers from Spain and 
expects to receive US $500 million in return for rolling back 
the proposed tax on hotel rooms.  Fernandez told the 
Ambassador that the assistance from Spain was a \"firm 
commitment.\" 
 
5.  (C)  The Ambassador and Fernandez discussed the Dominican 
energy sector.  Fernandez told the Ambassador that Venezuela 
would provide oil to the Dominican Republic at half the 
current world rate per barrel.  In addition, Venezuela would 
provide US $250 million in assistance.  Fernandez offered to 
serve as a messenger between Venezuelan President Chavez and 
the United States.  He also speculated that President Chavez 
would be successful in the upcoming Venezuelan referendum. 
 
----------- 
Corruption 
----------- 
 
6.  (C)  The Ambassador and Fernandez discussed potential 
appointees to Fernandez\'s cabinet.  Fernandez was grateful 
for the USG offer to vet potential appointees and receptive 
to the USG message that members of the in-coming 
administration should be free of ties to corruption. 
Fernandez assured the Ambassador that he will not allow 
corruption in his administration.  Fernandez criticized the 
current Attorney General and said that he would \"fry8 former 
legal advisor to President Mejia, Guido Gomez Mazara. 
Fernandez also said that current Attorney General Victor 
Cespedes accepts sexual favors from incarcerated Colombian 
nationals in return for their release. 
 
7.  (C)  Fernandez denied rumors that he or his transition 
team is brokering a deal to drop criminal charges against 
former Baninter executives Ramon Baez Figueroa and Marcos 
Baez Coco.  Fernandez said that Baez Figueroa,s attorney, 
Vinicio Castillo, is not only one of the best attorneys in 
the Dominican Republic, but one of the best in the world.  He 
told the Ambassador that when the case goes to trial, 
Castillo would implicate current President Mejia, Colonel 
Pepe Goico, Central bank Governor Jose Lois Malkun and 
members of the Baninter liquidation committee. 
 
8.  (C)  Fernandez expressed dismay at the state of the 
nation saying that there is &no Dominican Republic to 
inherit8 and that he will be \"restructuring the country from 
scratch.8 
 
----------------- 
Military matters 
----------------- 
 
9.  (C)  Fernandez asked about methods for reducing the size 
of the Dominican military and professionalizing the troops. 
The Ambassador and Defense Attache suggested that the 
military would provide a good opportunity for Fernandez to 
demonstrate a &zero tolerance8 policy against corruption. 
Defense Attache will provide Fernandez with information on 
right-sizing the military and a copy of the current PRD 
administration\'s regional security strategy that Fernandez 
requested.  The current Dominican regional security strategy 
has not yet been implemented. 
 
---------------------------- 
Comment and action request: 
---------------------------- 
 
10.  (C)  Comment.  Fernandez was open and pleased to meet 
with the Ambassador.  He appeared genuine when he told the 
Ambassador that his door will always be open for the 
Ambassador.  Fernandez recognizes the importance of the 
strong bilateral relationship between our countries.  He is 
predisposed to working with us, although he has a broader 
world view than outgoing President Mejia and will most likely 
dedicate more time to building relationships with Latin 
American and European partners.  End Comment. 
 
11.  (C)  Action Request:  Embassy Santo Domingo requests 
Department assistance in scheduling the following meetings 
with Dominican President-elect Leonel Fernandez as soon as 
possible after Fernandez takes office (August 16): 1) The 
President (or drop-by meeting); 2) The Secretary; 3) NSA Dr. 
Condoleezza Rice; 4) Treasury Secretary Snow. 
 
12.  (U)  Drafted by Angela Kerwin. 
 
13.  (U)  This report and others in our transition and 
election series are available on our SIPRNET site 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/  along with 
other material. 
MARSHALL 
"
"19438","8/4/2004 17:47","04SANTODOMINGO4502","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE144850","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004502 
 
SIPDIS 
 
ATTENTION: WHA/EX MARY MCBRIDE 
WHA/CAR KAREN JO MCISAAC 
 
E.O 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT, APER, ASEC 
SUBJECT: WHA SPRING 2005 INTERN PROGRAM 
 
REF:  A) SECSTATE 144850 
 
ANTO DOMINGO IS INTERESTING IN PARTICIPATING IN THE WHA SPRING 
2005 INTERN PROGRAM.  THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION AS PER REFTEL: 
 
1-NUMBER OF INTERNS REQUESTED: TWO INTERNS A) ECONOMIC INTERN B) 
CONSULAR INTERN 
2-LANGUAGE REQUIREMENT: SPANISH MIN 2+ 2+ 
3-WHAT SECTION WILL THE INTERN WORK: A)ECOPOL , B) CONSULATE 
4-WHO WILL SUPERVISE THE INTERN: A)MICHAEL MEIGS, ECOPOL 
COUNSELOR (809) 731-4335, B) MARY B. MARSHALL, DEPUTY CONSUL 
GENERAL (809) 731-4336 
5-SPECIFIC DUTIES, PROJECTS INTERN WILL PERFORM: EMBASSY SANTO 
DOMINGO WANTS TO HAVE A UNIVERSITY INTERN FOR THE COMBINED 
ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL SECTION ANY TIME THAT ONE IS AVAILABLE IN 
UPCOMING SELECTIONS.  THIS REQUEST INCLUDES BOTH SPRING AND 
SUMMER OF 2005. A)THE ECOPOL INTERN WILL COVER DUTIES NORMALLY 
ASSIGNED TO A SECOND TOUR OFFICER, FULL PARTICIPATION IN THE 
ACTIVITIES OF A BUSY 7 PERSON ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL SECTION IN A 
COUNTRY FRIENDLY TO THE UNITED STATES, SUBJECT TO ECONOMIC 
DIFFICULTIES AND INSTITUTIONAL WEAKNESSESS. PRODUCING WRITTEN 
MATERIAL, INCLUDING SUMMARIES OF CURRENT POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC 
TOPICS, MEMORANDA OF CONVERSATION, BIOGRAPHIC MATERIAL, BRIEFING 
MATERIAL FOR THE AMBASSADOR, AND IF THE OPPORTUNITY ARISES, 
DRAFTS FOR TELEGRAPHIC REPORTS TO THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE. 
PARTICIPATION IN DEMARCHES TO DOMINICAN OFFICIALS IN VISITS OF 
USG OFFICIALS AND IN REPRESENTATIONAL EVENT.  DAILY REVIEW OF 
LOCAL NEWSPAPER, IDENTIFIACTION OF TOPICS OF INTEREST TO THE USG. 
INVOLVEMENT PRODUCING MATERIAL FOR THE EMBASSY\'S CLASSIFIED 
WEBSITE SERVING THE USG. AS WARRANTED, TRAVEL OUTSIDE SANTO 
DOMINGO FOR ORIENTATION AND INVESTIGATION.  A MEMORANDUM OF 
PERFORMANCE IS PREPARED AT THE END OF THE ASSIGNMENT. 
B) THE CONSULATE INTERN WOULD BE DIRECTLY SUPERVISED BY THE 
DEPUTY CONSUL GENERAL OR BY A UNIT CHIEF.  WHILE THEY WOULD NOT 
BE DOING LINE CONSULAR WORK, THEY WOULD BE GIVEN RESEARCH 
PROJECTS COMMENSURATE WITH A FIRST - OR - SECOND- TOUR FOREIGN 
SERVICE OFFICER, WHICH INCLUDES PRODUCING MEMORANDA AND DRAFTING 
CABLES OR REPORTS TO THE DEPARTMENT; ATTENDING MEETINGS WITH 
DOMINICAN OFFICIALS AND OTHER CONSULAR CONTACTS; REVIEWING LOCAL 
NEWSPAPER AND ELECTRONIC MEDIA FOR TOPICS OF INTEREST TO THE 
CONSULAR SECTION; AND AS ARRANGED, TRAVEL OUTSIDE SANTO DOMINGO 
FOR MEETINGS AND INVESTIGATIONS.  A MEMORANDUM OF PERFORMANCE 
WILL BE PREPARED AT THE END OF THE ASSIGNMENT. 
6- HOUSING: EMBASSY CANNOT GUARANTEE THAT USG HOUSING WILL BE 
AVAILABLE FOR AN INTERN.  ONCE POSSIBLE DATES ARE KNOWN WE CAN 
SEEK TO IDENTIFY HOUSING THAT MAY BE AVAILABLE BETWEEN TENANTS OR 
HOUSE-SITTING OPPORTUNITIES; IF NECESSARY, WE CAN SEEK TO PUT AN 
INCOMING INTERN IN CONTACT WITH POSSIBLE SOURCES FOR SHORT-TERM 
RENTAL OF A SIMPLE FURNISHED ROOM OR APARTMENT. 
 7- VISA REQUIREMENTS: THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC REQUIRES A VISA TO 
ENTER THE COUNTRY AND IT IS HIGHLY ENCOURAGED TO OBTAIN VISAS 
BEFORE ARRIVAL. IF FOR SOME REASON YOU ARE UNABLE TO OBTAIN A 
VISA PRIOR TO TRAVEL, A TOURIST VISA CAN BE PURCHASED AT THE 
AIRPORT IN SANTO DOMINGO. THE COST IS USD 20. 
8-INNOCULATIONS REQUIRED: NONE (RECOMMENDED HEPATITS A AND B) 
9-DEPOSITS REQUIRED:POST ENCOURAGES A DEPOSIT OF US$300 FOR 
MISCELLANEOUS EXPENSES. 
10-SECURITY CLEARANCES: SECRET 
MARSHALL 
"
"19468","8/5/2004 14:24","04SANTODOMINGO4514","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 004514 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR AND WHA 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI; SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/04/2009 
TAGS: PGOV, ASEC, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN TRANSITION 11: STUDENTS PROTEST 
VIOLENTLY AGAINST MEJIA 
 
 
Classified By: Acting DCM Mary B. Marshall for Reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (U) This is no. 11 in our series on the Dominican 
Republic\'s transition to a new administration: 
 
STUDENTS PROTEST VIOLENTLY AGAINST MEJIA 
 
2. (U) Police estimated that 200 students protested violently 
at the inauguration by President Mejia of a new central 
library at the Autonomous University of Santo Domingo (UASD), 
the nation\'s largest institution of higher learning, on 
August 3.  The students said they opposed inaugurating a 
library that lacks books and computers.  The previously 
announced demonstration turned violent after the ceremony, 
when protesters pelted the President\'s departing motorcade 
with rocks and other objects and the presidential security 
detail responded with warning shots.  Protesters also 
destroyed a commemorative plaque crediting the Mejia 
administration with the building.  There were no injuries or 
arrests, according to police, but vehicles were damaged. 
University authorities subsequently suspended a professor and 
seven students, expelled two more students, and threatened to 
prosecute a non-student participant.  They closed the main 
campus through August 4; classes are scheduled to resume 
August 5. 
 
3. (C) Embassy contacts in the Military Adjutants Corps -- 
which provides presidential security -- told us the 
President\'s advisers had recommended he skip the 
inauguration.  However, Supervisor of Public Works Hernani 
Salazar, a close adviser to Mejia who had pushed for the 
library\'s completion, urged the President to attend.  Our 
contacts acknowledged that the adjutants had failed to 
perform an advance site inspection with enough lead time to 
cancel the President\'s appearance, once the demonstrators\' 
presence became obvious.  They said some of Mejia\'s advisors 
tried to blame President-elect Fernandez\'s PLD for inciting 
the protest, but said that in fact a student federation had 
organized it. 
 
4. (U) Editorials in two leading dailies denounced the 
student violence.  News commentator Ana Mitila Lora, while 
agreeing with this point, attributed the disturbance to 
rising public irritation over widespread and extended power 
blackouts and the nation\'s other serious economic problems, 
and President Mejia\'s apparent reluctance to address them 
during the transition to the administration of 
President-elect Fernandez, scheduled to take office August 16. 
 
5. (SBU) Comment:  Sporadic protests, mostly against the 
electricity crisis, have occurred over the past few weeks and 
have provoked a few violent incidents, mostly in low income 
neighborhoods.  The UASD protest is another symptom of the 
public\'s displeasure with the outgoing administration. 
However, it does not appear to signal any new trend of 
escalating disturbances.  The upcoming inauguration, and 
public expectations of the new administration, should -- at 
least temporarily -- calm the waters.  Whether the public\'s 
patience holds over the next few months remains to be seen. 
End comment. 
 
6. Drafted by Bainbridge Cowell. 
 
7. This and other reports in our election and transition 
series can be read on the SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ index.cfm, along 
with extensive additional material. 
MARSHAL 
"
"19475","8/5/2004 15:05","04SANTODOMINGO4515","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE160827","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004515 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, KSCA, TBIO, OSCI 
SUBJECT: REQUEST FOR ASSESSMENT OF FOREIGN POLICY 
IMPLICATIONS OF A PROPOSED RESEARCH PROJECT NO. 1 P30 
AI42848 INVOLVING A FOREIGN INSTITUTION. 
 
REF: SECSTATE 160827 
 
U.S. Embassy Santo Domingo has no objection to reftel. 
MARSHALL 
"
"19477","8/5/2004 16:30","04SANTODOMINGO4531","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 004531 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADINSON 
TREASURY FOR OASIA AND LAMONICA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, ENRG, MCAP, PGOV, PINR, PREL, EINV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN TRANSITION 12-PRESIDENT FERNANDEZ NAMES 
ECONOMIC TEAM 
 
1. (U) This is number 12 in our series on the transition 
between the Mejia and Fernandez adminstrations. 
 
President-elect Fernandez- Two weeks from power. 
 
2. (U) Summary.  President-elect Leonel Fernandez on August 4 
announced appointments to his administration, mainly in 
positions related to economic affairs.  Four of the eight 
appointees had served in President Fernandez\'s previous 
administration from 1996-2000. Below is a list of the names 
and a short biography of each.  End Summary. 
 
3. (U) Eusebio Rafael Camilo Abreu (Superintendent of Banks) 
is a career Professor of Economics and Sociology at UASD.  He 
is a member of the National Committee of the Partido de la 
Liberacin Dominicana (PLD) and was appointed as a National 
Director of Planning (ONAPLAN) during the first Fernndez 
administration (1996-2000), serving for all four years.  More 
recently, Mr. Camilo has been a private consultant and member 
of the Economic Commission and Programming Commission for the 
Fernndez transition team. 
 
4. (U) Vicente Bengoa (Secretary of Finance) is an economist 
and former Superintendent of Banks during 1996-2000.  He has 
been a Congressional deputy for the PLD in the past, and 
recently headed the FILA (Frente Independiente Leonel al 
Poder) movement for the 2004 Presidential Election. 
 
5. (U) Juan Temstocles Monts Domnguez (Technical Secretary 
of the Presidency) is a chemical engineer and economist, who 
completed his formal studies in the Dominican Republic and 
Spain.  Monts was a founder of the PLD in 1973 and has been 
a member of its central committee and political committee. 
He served as a PLD deputy in Congress from 1986 to 1990.  He 
was the General Manager of the National Electrical Company 
(CDE) in the first Leonel Fernandez administration 
(1996-1998) and the main promoter of electric sector 
privatization and reform based on recommendations from the 
World Bank and Inter-American Development Bank.  He was the 
Technical Secretary of the Presidency (minister of planning) 
for the remainder of the first Fernandez administration 
(1998-2000).  Monts was in charge of the PLD platform in the 
2004 election campaign and was appointed by President-elect 
Fernandez as the Coordinator of the Transition Commission. 
 
6. (U) Daniel Toribio Marmolejos (Manager of Banco de 
Reservas) is a professional economist educated in the 
Dominican Republic. He was a professor at the Universidad 
Autonoma de Santo Domingo and director of the National Fiscal 
Training Institute in the Secretariat of Finance. Toribio 
served as Secretary of Finance during the first Fernandez 
administration (1996-2000).  He later worked as a private 
consultant before being selected as a member of the 
Transition Commission by President-elect Fernandez on May 20. 
 
7. (U) Juan Hernandez (Director General of Internal Taxes) is 
an economist from PUCMM with post-graduate studies on tax 
systems.  In 1996, he was the General Director for the Income 
Tax Office, and in 1998, he became the first General Director 
for Internal Taxes.  In 1985, he served as Under Secretary 
for Finances. 
 
8. (U) Hector Valdez Albizu (Governor of the Central Bank) is 
an economist; not an activist for any particular party, he is 
basically a technician who started his career in the Central 
Bank in 1970 and rose to the position of Governor step by 
step.  In 1991, President Balaguer appointed him as the 
Central Bank,s representative on the Administration Council 
for the Banco de Reservas. He was named Administrator for 
this Bank, 1993-1995, and then Balaguer appointed him 
Governor of the Central Bank, a position which he continued 
to hold during the first Fernndez Administration (1996-2000). 
 
9. (U) Julio Ortega-Tous (Head of the President,s Council of 
Economic Advisors), an economist and sociologist, was Deputy 
Director of the External Debt Department in the Central Bank, 
Director of Foreign Investment, and Technical Manager of the 
Central Bank from 1993 to 1995.  Ortega-Tous was the National 
Director of Planning (ONAPLAN) from 1991-1993. During the 
first Fernndez administration (1996-2000), Ortega-Tous was 
Deputy Technical Secretary of the Presidency (1996-1999) and 
Ambassador to Canada (1999-2000).  Subsequently, Ortega-Tous 
worked as a Senior Advisor of the Banco del Progreso, a 
commercial bank. Ortega-Tous is currently President-elect 
Fernandez\'s coordinator of international economists. 
10. (U) Miguel Cocco (Director General of Customs) held the 
same post during the first Fernndez administration 
(1996-2000).  In August 1999, he experienced problems with 
his kidneys and sought treatment in the U.S. Cocco was an 
early follower of PLD founder Juan Bosch, and his brother, 
Manuel Cocco, has served as an economist in previous 
Dominican administrations. 
 
11. (U) Drafted by Mark Kendrick. 
 
12. (U) This report and others in our transition and election 
series are available on our SIPRNET site 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/  along with 
extensive other material. 
MARSHALL 
"
"19484","8/5/2004 21:50","04SANTODOMINGO4534","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE155586","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004534 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KTIA, EAIR 
SUBJECT: AMENDING AIR TRANSPORT AGREEMENT CRS PROVISIONS 
DEMARCHE DELIVERED TO DOMINICAN CIVIL AIR AUTHORITIES 
 
REF: SECSTATE 155586 
 
 1. Embassy delivered reftel talking points as a non-paper to 
Director General of Civil Aviation (DGAC) Carlos Alvarez 
Guzman. Embassy will forward any response received. 
MARSHALL 
"
"19575","8/9/2004 16:47","04SANTODOMINGO4579","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004579 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KDEM, KPAO, VE, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: DEMARCHE ON VENEZUELAN 
REFERENDUM 
 
REF: STATE 168747 
 
1. (SBU) On August 6 poloff delivered points para 3 reftel to 
MFA international organizations deputy director Rhadys Abreu 
de Polanco, and urged the GODR to issue a statement 
supporting a free, fair, and transparent process in the 
Venezuelan presidential referendum August 15.  Poloff also 
advocated engagement of local NGOs on the referendum issue. 
 
2. (SBU) Abreu de Polanco undertook to pass our request to 
Foreign Secretary Frank Guerrero Prats.  She noted, however, 
the GODR\'s policy of non-intervention in other nations\' 
internal affairs and the need for any statement to be 
scrupulously evenhanded and based on democratic principles. 
She downplayed the possible role of any Dominican NGOs, 
claiming that -- fairly or unfairly -- they are often 
perceived has being partisan.  Poloff asked that we be 
informed of the foreign secretary\'s decision regarding a GODR 
statement. 
 
3. (SBU) Comment: The GODR will undergo a change of 
administrations on August 16, the day after the Venezuelan 
referendum.  Senior officials in the GODR, including many at 
the MFA, expect to be replaced by persons sympathetic to 
President-elect Leonel Fernandez\'s PLD. Some mid-rank 
officials hope to be retained by the new administration. 
 
4. (SBU) Relations with Caracas are sensitive because of the 
GODR\'s reliance on oil supplies from Venezuela.  Fernandez 
briefly visited President Chavez in June, and local press has 
reported Chavez\'s announced intention to attend Fernandez\'s 
inauguration on August 16. Under these circumstances, it is 
unlikely the outgoing administration will issue any statement 
on the referendum. 
 
5. (SBU) The small number of Dominican NGOs respected for 
their advocacy of democracy-related topics focus entirely on 
domestic political reforms and respect for human rights. 
They lack the mandate for international engagement. 
KUBISKE 
"
"19654","8/11/2004 23:09","04SANTODOMINGO4635","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004635 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR, EB/TPP/MTA/IPC; USDOC PASS USPTO; WHITE 
HOUSE FOR USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KIPR, PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN CONGRESS STALLS EFFORT TO UNDERCUT IPR 
PROTECTION 
 
 
1.  Summary.  On August 11 Charge and EcoPol counselor urged 
Dominican House of Representatives President Alfredo Pacheco 
to block draft legislation from the Senate intended to reduce 
penalties for IPR infringements and to institute automatic 
compulsory licensing of patents.  Pacheco said that he will 
allow the draft measure to expire with the end of the 
extraordinary session and will not allow precipitate acion on 
it in the session to begin next week.  End Summary. 
 
2.  Dominican IPR attorney Mary Fernandez contacted the 
Embassy on August 9 to advise that in unpublicized action on 
July 22 the Dominican Senate had quickly passed legislation 
that would alter existing law to provide that a) in cases of 
requests for compulsory licensing of patents, these would be 
considered granted in the event that the authorities take no 
administrative action in the period of 120 days, and b) 
current penalties for IPR infringement would be revised to 
exclude jail terms and to set fines on a scale that would not 
exceed 250,000 Dominican pesos (approximately USD 5,000). 
Fernandez provided a facsimile of the draft legislation, 
which reportedly remained in the Dominican Senate awaiting 
transmission to the House of Representatives. 
 
3.  The Charge, FCS counselor, and EcoPol staff received 
Fernandez and regional representative of U.S. pharmaceutical 
manufacturer Merck Sharp and Dohme on August 10 and on August 
11 the Charge and EcoPol counselor called on House of 
Representatives President Alfredo Pacheco.  Pacheco indicated 
that he had just received the Senate draft, along with other 
legislation seeking to set up a closer regime of supervision 
for fuel distribution.  \"I will not move quickly on these 
issues,\" he commented.  \"One thing I have learned in this 
year\'s term as president is that it\'s a mistake to push 
measures through in a hurry.\" 
 
4.  The Charge pointed out the potential of this legislation 
for undermining business confidence; she also stressed the 
requirements of the TRIPS agreement for patent protection, 
due process, and disuasive enforcement measures. She provided 
background material taken from the WTO website, the TRIPS 
articles concerning patents, and relevant text from the Doha 
ministerial declaration of the World Trade Organization. 
KUBISKE 
"
"19663","8/12/2004 10:46","04SANTODOMINGO4637","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE3749","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 004637 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR AND WHA;NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI; SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/10/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, ECON, EPET, MCAP, DR, VE 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN TRANSITION #14: FERNANDEZ TELLS 
AMBASSADOR HE HAS HALF-PRICE OIL FROM VENEZUELA AND 
PROMISES OF DOLLAR LOANS 
 
REF: STATE 3749 
 
Classified By: Economic and Political Counselor Michael Meigs for Reaso 
n 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
 1. (U) This no. 14 in our series on the transition to a new 
presidential administration in the Dominican Republic. 
 
Lunch with Leonel 
 
(U) On August 6, the Ambassador and visiting Senator Bill 
Nelson (D-FL) attended a lunch hosted by President-elect 
Leonel Fernandez (PLD) at the office of his Global Foundation 
for Democarcy and Development.  Also present were Alfonso 
Fanjul of the Central Romana Corporation and Alberto 
Ibarquen, editor of the Miami Herald.  The Defense Attache 
was notetaker.  The lunch, just 10 days before Fernandez is 
to be installed as President, enabled him to talk with his 
guests at length about topics of interest to the United 
States, while also affording insights into how he views his 
impending presidency. 
 
Rescuing the Economy 
 
(SBU) The President-elect spent much of the time discussing 
the deteriorating economic situation, which had undermined 
President Mejia\'s popularity and helped bring Fernandez to 
power.  Fernandez said he has to take immediate steps to 
stabilize the economy, and has said publicly that he will not 
increase public spending, including on salaries, until the 
economy stabilizes.  He said his initial economic plan 
involves quickly increasing Central Bank liquidity so it can 
protect the value of the peso, allowing him to focus on the 
longer-term health of the economy. 
 
(C) In particular, Fernandez told his guests, he has several 
commitments that could generate more than 1 billion dollars 
in liquidity for the country.  Foremost among these is USD 
500 million in investments in the tourism industry promised 
by Spanish companies in return for rolling back the proposed 
tax on hotel rooms.  In addition, Fernandez said, he has 
offers of dollar loans to the Central Bank from Brazil (USD 
250 million), Venezuela (USD 250 million), and Spain (USD 150 
million).  Fernandez said he will try to negotiate additional 
loans by governments and private institutitons. His goal is 
to raise confidence in the Dominican peso, which could then 
help lower inflation. 
 
(C) Fernandez said dollarization is something that will 
eventually happen in the country, but it is impossible in the 
short term.  He said he would be labeled as \"selling the 
nation\" if he proposes dollarization as an alternative 
monetary policy. 
 
Fernandez and Chavez: A Close Relationship 
 
(C) Fernandez also spoke at length about his ties to 
President Hugo Chavez of Venezuela, professing admiration for 
his friend while also recognizing Chavez\'s autocratic 
tendencies.  The two leaders maintain excellent relations, 
according to Fernandez. 
 
(C) The Dominican Republic depends on Venezuela for much of 
the fuel that it uses to produce power.  The country is in 
the midst of an energy crisis, he said, because of rising 
fuel costs and because the government has failed to pay 
energy producers on time.  The constant power shortage is 
perhaps the biggest short-term problem that Fernandez faces 
when he takes office.  During a visit to Caracas in June, 
Fernandez used his friendship with Chavez to secure a promise 
of extremely favorable terms for oil imports -- a credit line 
for purchases of Venezuelan oil at half the world price, with 
no payments due for six months. 
 
(C) The group discussed President Chavez\'s leadership of 
Venezuela and his prospects in  the August 15 recall 
referendum.  Fernandez said Chavez will face serious problems 
even if he wins. Fernandez acknowledged a need for Chavez to 
tone down his rhetoric and concentrate more on good 
governance and less on image.  Chavez likes to emulate Fidel 
Castro, both in style and substance, Fernandez noted.  He has 
told Chavez that he must govern all of Venezuela, not just 
the poor, and reach out to business and the oligarchy. 
According to Fernandez, \"Chavez lacks leadership and has 
transformed nothing.  He is Fidel without talent, but with 
oil.\" 
 
(C) Fernandez says he sees himself as an international 
statesman.  He offered to be a bridge between the world and 
Venezuela, using his access and influence with the Venezuelan 
leader. 
 
The Fragility of a Latin American Mandate 
 
(SBU) Fernandez was keenly aware that he faces problems, even 
though he comes to office with a strong mandate.  He said 
that he understands the expectations of the people and  knows 
that his political honeymoon will not be long.  He referred 
to several other elected Western Hemisphere leaders in the 
recent past who were did not serve out their full terms 
because of economic or other crises. 
 
(SBU) Senator Nelson mentioned the possibility of a reduction 
in Dominican armed forces levels and suggested the United 
States might assist in this process.  Fernandez expressed 
interest in the idea and stressed that the lines of 
communication with the U.S. military would be open. 
 
(C) The Ambassador and Senator Nelson raised the topics of 
corruption, port security, the Third Border Initiative, and 
Dominican relations with Haiti.  The Ambassador reiterated 
his offer for the U.S. Embassy to vet the names of candidates 
for Fernandez\'s key appointments and encouraged him to fight 
corruption at all levels. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Jay Raman and LtCol Glenn Huber. 
 
3. (U) This report and others in our election and transition 
series can be read on the SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ index.cfm along 
with extensive other current material. 
KUBISKE 
"
"19688","8/12/2004 20:23","04SANTODOMINGO4665","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004665 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/OMA; TREASURY FOR LAMONICA, 
TOLOUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN CONGRESSIONAL LEADER OPTIMISTIC ABOUT 
TAX PACKAGE DESPITE POSTURING 
 
 
1.  (SBU) On August 11 President of the Dominican House of 
Representatives Alfredo Pacheco told Charge and EcoPol 
counselor that he expected, in the worst of cases, to obtain 
House approval for the first reading of the tax reform 
package on August 12.  Congressional procedure requires two 
approvals of a measure before it is transmitted to the other 
house.  Pacheco said he expected the House to finish with the 
measure by August 20, the end of the first week of the 
Fernandez administration. 
 
2.  (U) President Mejia delivered the tax package to the 
lower house a month ago and, as promised, did not change 
anything in the draft drawn up by advisors to President-elect 
Fernandez. Hearings in the House Finance Committee have been 
extensive.  All sectors agree on the need to raise government 
revenues but each has had its own case to plead. House 
Finance Committee chair Marino Collante has told the press 
that members of \"95 percent\" of the way to agreement. 
 
3.  (SBU) Pacheco appeared confident that major differences 
had been ironed out.  He mentioned, as an example, the 
agreement to take the suggestion of the commercal banking 
association to replace a 15 percent tax on interest with a 
levy of 0.15 percent of the amount transferred by checks -- 
Pacheco said that the committee decided to exclude ATM 
transactions, as a measure of relief for the middle class. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
On to the Senate 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
4.  (SBU) Pacheco\'s re-election as president of the House on 
August 16, before presidential inauguration ceremonies, is 
virtually assured, since there are no other serious 
contenders,  Sen. Andres Bautista is expected to win election 
as President of the Senate.  Pacheco and Bautista met earlier 
this week with Monsignor Agripino Nunez, who was urging early 
passage of the tax package.  Bautista, a member of the 
soon-to-be-opposiion PRD, assured Nunez that the Senate would 
finish its work on taxes \"within 30 days, because of the 
needs of the country.\" 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Party Headquarters Oppose 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
5.  (U) Newspaper stories on August 12 were suggesting 
complications.  The PRD party headquarters issued a formal 
statement, conditioning party acceptance of tax measures upon 
enactment of a 30 percent increase in salaries in both 
private and public sectors and a program to continue 
subsidies for cooking gas and to assure reasonable prices for 
staples and essential items.  The PRSC Executive Committee 
approved a resolution calling for the measure to be 
considered only after the August 16 inauguration, and 
instructed its representatives to walk out of any earlier 
plenary discussion of the project. 
 
6.  (SBU) Comment: We see these reactions as posturing, while 
the new opposition awaits to engage Fernandez after his own 
term begins next week.  No one really wants another 30 days 
of threadbare debate on these measures, which are, even as 
now drafted, only the barest starting point for bringing the 
IMF back to the table. 
 
KUBISKE 
"
"19690","8/12/2004 20:32","04SANTODOMINGO4666","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SANTODOMINGO2026","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 004666 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR, DRL/L, EB/TRA 
DEPT PASS DEPT OF TRANSPORTATION AND FEDERAL AVIATION 
ADMINISTRATION 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, ELAB, EAIR, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLERS HOPE FOR EARLY 
RAISES FROM FERNANDEZ ADMINISTRATION 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 2026 
 
1. Summary.  The salary dispute between the Association of 
Air Traffic Controllers (ACTA) and the Dominican Civil 
Aviation Authority (DGAC) that resulted in a three-day 
lockout in late March remains unresolved.  Although the union 
and the government do not have good relations now, there is 
hope that when the new administration takes power on August 
16 the two sides can reinitiate constructive discussions. 
End Summary. 
 
2. The Dominican Association of Air Traffic Controllers 
(ACTA) represents the approximately 200 civilian air traffic 
controllers in the Dominican Republic.  Many of the 
controllers work in private airports, but all are paid by the 
government.  In late March 2004 ACTA asked for a 100 percent 
pay increase for all air traffic controllers and suggested 
the possibility of a \"go-slow\" action (reftel).  The 
government locked out the controllers and turned to the 
approximately 50 Dominican military controllers.  The 
military controllers managed the system, although with 
delays, until ACTA was allowed back to work a few days later. 
 The government also brought in an unknown number of foreign 
air traffic controllers (including Mexicans and some AmCits), 
under contract through the May 16 election, to stand by in 
case of further labor problems. 
 
Government View 
 
3. On August 3, Director of Aviation Regulations for the 
Dominican Civil Aviation Authority (DGAC) Gender Castro, an 
air traffic controller himself, reiterated to Emboffs the 
Mejia administration\'s position that the there is no money 
available to the controllers because the government budget is 
not healthy enough to provide raises for all of the public 
sector.  Castro cited President Mejia\'s rebuttal that \"this 
country is not for one, but for all.\"  Castro said that DGAC 
and ACTA do not disagree that controllers deserve a salary 
increase, but disagree that the government should provide 
such an increase only to them. 
 
4. According to Castro, ACTA rejected a suggestion from the 
private sector for a combination of raises and increased 
benefits.  DGAC thinks that ACTA has become politicized and 
would reject any proposal short of the 100 percent pay raise. 
 Castro complained that it was impossible to deal with ACTA 
because of the union\'s hostility toward the current 
government. 
 
5. When asked about the performance of the military 
controllers during the lockout, Castro said that although 
they are capable of performing the job of the civilian 
controllers in an emergency, the military does not have 
enough controllers to handle the traffic for more than a few 
days.  The government would need help from outside 
controllers in the event of a lengthy strike or lockout. 
 
Union View 
 
6. On August 10, ACTA President Bolivar De Leon told Emboffs 
that since the last salary increase for controllers in 1997, 
due to the devaluation of the Dominican peso the controllers 
now make less than half in dollars of what they used to earn. 
 (News reports indicate that controllers received a 100 
percent salary adjustment in pesos at the end of 2002, 
although even with the raise the average controller still 
made only about USD 1000 per month.)  De Leon said that the 
controllers want salaries commensurate with those of air 
traffic controllers in the United States because the 
technical skills and stress are the same.  DGAC disagrees, 
contending that Dominican controllers handle fewer flights 
and do not possess the same level of technical English as 
their counterparts. 
 
7. De Leon indicated that although relations are not good 
with DGAC, ACTA hopes for improvements with the incoming 
Fernandez administration, which takes office on August 16. 
De Leon appeared confident that an agreement on salaries 
could be reached quickly with the new administration. 
 
Comment 
8. The negotiating position of ACTA is relatively weak 
because Mejia showed that the air traffic controllers could 
be replaced.  However, ACTA will probably move immediately to 
restart salary negotiations with Fernandez even though 
Fernandez has said publicly that he is going to concentrate 
on improving the overall health of the economy before raising 
public sector salaries.  When poloff asked De Leon what ACTA 
would do if Fernandez did not agree to raise salaries 
straight away, the union chief declined to respond. 
Fernandez will have a brief honeymoon when he takes office, 
but many groups, including the controllers, are expecting 
little short of a miracle.  Labor conflict in the Dominican 
Republic could increase dramatically by the end of the year. 
KUBISKE 
"
"19754","8/13/2004 16:57","04SANTODOMINGO4672","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE173809","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 004672 
 
SIPDIS 
 
CODEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT, ASEC, OTRA, DR 
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE APPROVAL - CODEL DODD (15-17 AUG) 
 
REF: SECSTATE 173809 
 
1. U.S. Embassy Santo Domingo welcomes and grants country 
clearance to Senator Christopher J. Dodd to travel to Santo 
Domingo.  The purpose of this trip is to attend the 
presidential inauguration of President-elect Fernandez from 
15-17 August, 2004. 
 
2.  Embassy assistance is requested. 
 
------------------------- 
3.  Hotel Accommodations: 
------------------------- 
Hotel reservations are confirmed at the Hotel Embajador 
located on Sarasota Avenue #65.  Hotel Embajador contact 
numbers are as follows: 
Tel: (809)221-2131  Fax: (809)532-5306.  Per diem in Santo 
Domingo USD 107 (including taxes).  Hotel Room No. is 637 and 
breakfast is included. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
4.  Contact with US Embassy Requested: 
-------------------------------------- 
POC is Stefanie Eye at (809)731-4293, (809)697-1867 (cell), 
(809)541-4944 (home),(809)731-4335, or eyesb@state.gov. In 
case of an emergency during visit, including medical, please 
contact the US Embassy Post One at (809) 221-2171, extension 
4398. 
 
-------------------- 
5. Travel Documents: 
-------------------- 
All official visitors are encouraged to enter the Dominican 
Republic on valid passports, with valid visas.  If a visa 
cannot be obtained before entry into the Dominican Republic, 
a 30-day visa can be purchased for USD 10.00 in the airport 
terminal upon arrival. A USD 20.00 airport departure tax is 
charged to all non-residents leaving the country.  Many US 
carriers include this tax in the ticket price, so please 
consult your ticket. 
 
---------------------- 
6.  Monetary Exchange: 
---------------------- 
Visitors are encouraged to bring sufficient US Dollars cash, 
traveler,s checks or credit cards for cash advances.  Many 
merchants in the DR do not accept US currency in payment for 
goods and services.  Most commercial banks and hotels provide 
exchange services, with hotels offering slightly less 
favorable terms than banks.  Banco de Reservas, a Dominican 
commercial bank, offers check cashing and accommodation 
exchange services in the Embassy from 0900-1535 during 
official workdays.  USG employees are permitted to cash 
personal checks and can elect to either receive US Dollars or 
Dominican Pesos.  US credit cards, especially Visa and 
Mastercard, are widely accepted in major cities and tourist 
areas. 
 
---------------------- 
7.  Medical Attention: 
---------------------- 
In the event medical services from Embassy Health 
professionals are required, visitors will be expected to 
provide a copy of their orders upon receipt of care.  In 
cases of emergency, please contact Post One at (809) 
221-2171, extension 4398 or (809) 731-4398. 
 
------------------------------ 
8.  Country Threat Assessment: 
------------------------------ 
A)  Terrorism:  The Dominican Republic (DR) is considered a 
low threat post for terrorism.  There are no indigenous 
terrorist groups operating in the DR.  However, transnational 
terrorism is a possibility due to a number of factors, some 
of which include porous borders, a culture of corruption, 
inept police, and the Dominican Republic,s support for the 
war in Iraq.  These factors, and others, make the DR a 
potential target for transnational terrorism. 
 
B)  Crime:  The Dominican Republic is considered a high 
threat post for crime.  Street robberies, pick pocketing, 
credit card fraud, ATM fraud, burglaries, and theft from 
vehicles are all common crimes in the Dominican Republic.  If 
you are the victim of a street robbery, do not resist. 
Statistically, everyone who resists robbery is injured. 
Those who cooperate with robbers, i.e., give them some money, 
are always left unharmed.  To avoid credit card fraud, avoid 
excessive use of credit cards while in country.  Contact your 
card provider and advise them what charges you will be making 
while visiting the DR.  Keep a close watch over your credit 
card charges even weeks after leaving the Dominican Republic. 
 Fraudulent charges may not appear until well after you have 
returned to your place of origin. To avoid ATM fraud, use 
only ATMs that are located in major hotels, or collocated 
with banks.  Avoid using carros publicos, the least expensive 
type of taxi.  Many travelers have reported being pick 
pocketed in these vehicles.  Use established taxi services, 
or hotel taxis, which are considered safe. 
KUBISKE 
"
"19830","8/17/2004 13:33","04SANTODOMINGO4702","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE167657","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 004702 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT, APER 
SUBJECT:  COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR DR. WILLIAM H. SCOTTI 
 
REF:  SECSTATE 167657 
 
1.  US Embassy Santo Domingo welcomes and grants 
country clearance to Dr. William H. Scotti to travel to 
Santo Domingo from September 21 to September 23, 2004. 
Purpose of trip is to carry out activities relating to 
dependent education and assistance to American- 
sponsored schools. Embassy will meet and assist at 
airport. 
 
1.   Hotel Accommodations: 
------------------------ 
Hotel reservations are confirmed at the Hotel Jaragua. 
Hotel Jaragua contact numbers are as follows:  Tel: 809- 
221-2222 Fax: 809-221-8271 Per diem in Santo Domingo 
USD 107 (including taxes). The Embassy will be 
responsible for accomodations and M&IE. The following 
is the hotel reservation confirmation number: 
 
   Dr. William Scotti   Confirmation #307498 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
US Embassy Contact while in the Dominican Republic: 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Bainbridge Cowell Jr. is the Embassy Control Officer 
during this visit.  Contact numbers:  Office: 809-731- 
4307; Home: 809-472-1657; Mobile: 1-809-729-1636.  In 
case of an emergency during visit, including medical, 
please contact the US Embassy Post One at (809) 221- 
2171 ext. 4398 or (809) 731-4398. 
 
-------------------- 
4.    Travel Documents: 
-------------------- 
All official visitors are encouraged to enter the 
Dominican Republic on valid passports, with valid 
visas.  If a visa cannot be obtained before entry into 
the Dominican Republic, a 30-day visa can be purchased 
for USD 10.00 in the airport terminal upon arrival. A 
USD 20.00 airport departure tax is charged to all non- 
residents leaving the country.  Many US carriers 
include this tax in the ticket price, so please consult 
your ticket. 
 
--------------------- 
5.    Monetary Exchange: 
--------------------- 
Visitors are encouraged to bring sufficient cash in US 
Dollars, traveler\'s checks or credit cards for cash 
advances.  Many merchants in the DR do not accept US 
currency in payment for goods and services.  Most 
commercial banks and hotels provide exchange services, 
with hotels offering slightly less favorable terms than 
banks.  Banco de Reservas, a Dominican commercial bank, 
offers check cashing and accommodation exchange 
services in the Embassy from 0900-1535 during official 
workdays.  USG employees are permitted to cash personal 
checks and can elect to either receive US Dollars or 
Dominican Pesos.  US credit cards, especially Visa and 
Mastercard, are widely accepted in major cities and 
tourist areas. 
 
 
------------------------- 
6.    Cellular Phone Rental: 
------------------------- 
Cell phone rental is available through Verizon, a local 
provider.  Rental costs may vary, but on average cost 
is USD $1 per day.  Outgoing calls are approximately 
USD .50 per minute for calls within the Dominican 
Republic and USD .50 per minute, plus long distance 
charges, for international calls. 
 
----------------------------- 
7.    Country Threat Assessment: 
----------------------------- 
A)   Terrorism:  The Dominican Republic (DR) is 
    considered \"low\" 
threat post for terrorism.  There are no indigenous 
terrorist groups operating in the DR.  However, 
transnational terrorism is a possibility due to a 
number of factors, some of which include porous 
borders, a culture of corruption, inept police, and the 
Dominican Republic\'s support for the war in Iraq. 
These factors, and others, make the DR a potential 
target for transnational terrorism. 
 
B)   Crime:  The Dominican Republic is considered a 
    \"high\" threat 
post for crime.  Street robberies, pick pocketing, 
credit card fraud, ATM fraud, burglaries, and theft 
from vehicles are all common crimes in the Dominican 
Republic.  If you are the victim of a street robbery, 
do not resist.  Statistically, everyone who resists 
robbery is injured.  Those who cooperate with robbers 
i.e., give them some money, are always left unharmed. 
To avoid credit card fraud, avoid excessive use of 
credit cards while in country.  Contact your card 
provider and advise them what charges you will be 
making while visiting the DR.  Keep a close watch over 
your credit card charges even weeks after leaving the 
Dominican Republic.  Fraudulent charges may not appear 
until well after you have returned to your place of 
origin. To avoid ATM fraud, use only ATMs that are 
located in major hotels, or collocated with banks. 
Avoid using carro publicos, the least expensive type of 
taxi.  Many travelers have reported being pick pocketed 
in these vehicles.  Use established taxi services, or 
hotel taxis, which are considered safe. 
HERTELL 
"
"19860","8/18/2004 11:29","04SANTODOMINGO4719","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04SANTODOMINGO4637|04STATE3749","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 004719 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR AND WHA;NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI; SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/10/2014 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, ECON, EPET, MCAP, DR, VE 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN TRANSITION #13: FERNANDEZ TELLS 
AMBASSADOR HE HAS HALF-PRICE OIL FROM VENEZUELA AND 
PROMISES OF DOLLAR LOANS 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 4637 STATE 3749 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Hans H. Hertell for Reason 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
 1. (U) This is the amplified and corrected version of ref a, 
part of our series on the transition to a new presidential 
administration in the Dominican Republic.  Ten days before 
his inauguration, Leonel Fernandez spoke about his approach 
to the economic crisis and commented on his relations with 
Venezuela\'s Hugo Chavez. 
 
Lunch with Leonel 
 
(U) On August 6 the Ambassador and visiting Senator Bill 
Nelson (D-FL) attended a lunch hosted by President-elect 
Leonel Fernandez (PLD) at the office of his Global Foundation 
for Democracy and Development (FUNGLODE).  Also present were 
Alfonso Fanjul of sugar manufacturer Central Romana 
Corporation and Alberto Ibarquen, publisher of the Miami 
Herald.  The lunch took place just 10 days before Fernandez 
was to be installed as President. 
 
Rescuing the Economy 
 
(SBU) The President-elect spent much of the time discussing 
the deterioration of the Dominican economy under the Mejia 
administration, 2000-2004.  Fernandez said that he and his 
foundation have been busy while he has been out of office and 
that his administration already has mid-term and long-term 
plans to bring the country back to prosperity and economic 
stability.  He said his initial economic plan involves 
quickly increasing Central Bank foreign currency reserves 
liquidity so it can support the value of the peso, allowing 
him to focus on the longer-term health of the economy. 
 
(C) In particular, Fernandez told his guests, he has several 
commitments that could generate more than 1 billion dollars 
in hard currency inflow for the country.  Foremost among 
these is USD 500 million in investments in the tourism 
industry offered by Spanish companies in return for rolling 
back a proposed tax on hotel rooms.  In addition, Fernandez 
said, he has offers of dollar loans to the Central Bank from 
Brazil (USD 250 million), Venezuela (USD 250 million), and 
Spain (USD 150 million).  Fernandez said he will try to 
negotiate additional loans by governments and private 
institutions. His goal is to raise confidence in the 
Dominican peso, which could then help lower inflation. (Note: 
we heard subsequently that the Spanish companies may come 
through with considerably less, perhaps in the neighborhood 
of USD 200 million.) 
 
(C) In addition, Fernandez said, to provide immediate 
improvement in electricity supply and to build credibility 
with the Dominican public,  he has secured a USD 65 million 
loan from a large national bank to purchase fuel and keep 
electricity flowing as of August 17.  Fernandez admitted this 
was only a band-aid treatment but maintained it would buy his 
administration time to address the electric sector crisis in 
earnest. 
 
(C) When asked, Fernandez said dollarization would eventually 
happen in the Dominican republic.  In the long run, in his 
view, there will only be three world currencies: the US 
Dollar in the Western hemisphere, the euro in greater Europe, 
and the Japanese or Chinese yen in Asia. Dollarization is 
impossible in the short term for the Dominican 
administration. He said he would be labeled as \"selling the 
nation\" if he allowed the disappearance of a naional currency 
imprinted with portraits of the founding fathers. 
 
Fernandez and Chavez: A Relationship of Dependence 
 
(C) Responding to Senator Nelson\'s inquiry about relations 
with Venezuela, Fernandez said he finds Chavez charismatic 
but deplores his autocratic tendencies.  He said Chavez had 
considered Mejia unresponsive to allegations of 
coup-plotting, with the result that Chavez\'s already 
established relationship with Fernandez was further 
reinforced. 
 
(C) The Dominican Republic has long been a market for 
Venezuelan petroleum.  Fernandez noted that one factor in the 
current electricity crisis is the rising cost of fuel for 
generation; another is the fact that the government has 
failed to pay electricity generators and distributors on 
time.  Fernandez said that during his visit to Caracas in 
June, he secured a promise from Chavez of extremely favorable 
terms for oil imports -- a credit line for purchases of 
Venezuelan oil at half the world price, with no payments due 
for six months. 
 
(C) Fernandez said Chavez would face serious problems even if 
he won the August 15 recall referendum.  He said that he had 
told Chavez that this should be Chavez\'s last term in office. 
 Fernandez agreed on the need for Chavez to tone down his 
rhetoric and to concentrate more on good governance and less 
on image.  Fernandez indicated that he would communicate this 
to Chavez when they next meet.  Fernandez did not expect 
Chavez to attend the Dominican inauguration because of the 
timing of the referendum in Venezuela.  Fernandez described 
Chavez as wanting to emulate Fidel Castro, both in style and 
substance.  He says he told Chavez that he must govern for 
all Venezuelans, not just for the poor, and he reach out to 
business and the economic elites. \"Chavez lacks leadership 
skills to move implement his agenda, lacks a plan for doing 
so, and has transformed nothing in Venezuela.  He is Fidel 
without talent, but with oil.\" 
 
(C) Fernandez says he sees his role as that of an 
international statesman and he offered to be a bridge between 
the world and Venezuela. 
 
The Fragility of a Latin American Mandate 
 
(SBU) Fernandez was keenly aware that he faces problems, even 
though he comes to office with a strong mandate.  He said 
that he understands the high expectations of the people and 
knows that his political honeymoon will not be long.  He 
referred to several other Western Hemisphere presidents 
driven from office because of economic or other crises. 
Fernandez said that he was coming to the presidency at a 
challenging time and that the effort to rebuild the nation\'s 
institutions could take longer to accomplish than his 
four-year term in office.  He did not expect to not seek 
reelection in 2008 - - unless his party asks him to run 
again. 
 
(SBU) Senator Nelson mentioned the possibility of a reduction 
in Dominican armed forces levels and suggested the United 
States might assist in this process.  Fernandez expressed 
interest in the idea and stressed that the lines of 
communication with the U.S. military would be open. 
 
(SBU) The Ambassador and Senator Nelson spoke to Fernandez 
about the importance of dealing with corruption, port 
security, the U.S. Third Border Initiative, and Dominican 
relations with Haiti.  Senator Nelson stressed to Fernandez 
the importance of naming upstanding diplomats as Ambassador 
and Consuls in Haiti, reminding Fernandez of the significant 
responsibilites of those individuals for legitimate 
cross-border activity. 
 
(C) The Ambassador reiterated his offer for the U.S. Embassy 
to vet the names of candidates for Fernandez\'s key 
appointments and encouraged him to fight corruption at all 
levels. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Jay Raman and LtCol Glenn Huber. 
 
3. (U) This report and others in our election and transition 
series can be read on the SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ index.cfm along 
with extensive other current material. 
HERTELL 
"
"19951","8/20/2004 17:10","04SANTODOMINGO4784","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 004784 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/OMA; 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON;LABOR FOR ILAB; USCINCSO ALSO 
FOR POLAD;TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: TRANSITION #14: LEONEL FERNANDEZ AT DOMINICAN 
INAUGURAL PROMISES AUSTERITY, ANTI-CORRUPTION AND SUPPORT 
FOR SOCIAL CONCERNS 
 
 
 1. (SBU) This is #14 in our series on the transition between 
the Mejia and Fernandez governments in the Dominican Republic. 
 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - 
Fernandez promises Austerity, Anti-Corruption and Support for 
Social Concerns 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - 
 
In an eloquent, emphatic inaugural speech on August 16, a day 
of national pageantry, Leonel Fernandez reassumed the 
Dominican presidency with emphasis on the gravity of the 
economic crisis, an admonition on the inevitability of 
sacrifice, and the need for austerity. He declared his 
intention to cut current expenditures of the goverment by 20 
percent. 
 
Following are other principal points in his August 16 
declaration. (Our comments are at the end of this text.) 
 
FISCAL MEASURES 
 
- - He emphasized his intention to cut current expenditure 
and to negotiate a revised IMF standby agreement. 
 
- - To deal with the burden of Central Bank (CB) medium-term 
debt issued to cover bank failures, the incoming 
administration has obtained promises from national and 
international investors to lend dollars to the Bank at 
international rates.  These dollars will be used to retire 
some of the 90 billion pesos in medium-term debt (USD 2 
billion), on which the Bank has been obliged to pay high 
nominal interest rates (35 to 55 percent, according to date 
and term of issuance) 
 
- - He stated that the terms on all existing CB debt 
instruments will be respected. 
 
- - Fernandez asserts that these measures will result in new 
investment and the return of flight capital, stimulating 
growth and increased employment. 
 
CORRUPTION 
 
- - Corruption is \"morally and legally unacceptable\" and the 
administration will take all appropriate measures to prevent 
and punish corruption, in keeping with the OAS Interamerican 
Convention against Corruption. 
 
- - The administration will not pursue political reprisals 
but will not provide \"a clean slate and a new start\" for 
anyone accused of corruption. 
 
- - \"Let make clear once again: let no one try to whisper 
something to me in private that he is unwilling and unable to 
say to me in public.\" 
 
SOCIAL PROGRAMS 
 
- - UNDP statistics record that more than 1 million 
Dominicans have passed below the poverty line in recent years. 
 
- - The administration will initiate social action programs 
in health, nutrition, feeding, and education, with the help 
of civil society.  Emergency feeding programs will reach out 
to the poorest families, serving 25,000 families by January, 
2005 and eventually as many as 200,000.  An emergency program 
will aim to resupply hospitals with basic medicines. 
 
- - Special attention will be paid to subisidies and delivery 
of electricity and household cooking gas. 
- - Fernandez defended at length the concept of 
\"capitalization\" (privatization) initiated by his first 
administration, quoting a long paragraph from a recent report 
by the Special Commission on Energy summarizing advantages to 
date of privatization. 
 
- - Electricity blackouts occur because of high costs for 
fuel, electricity losses, non-payment by many users, and the 
inability to date of the government to pay promised 
subsidies.  Fernandez cited, point by point, the ten 
recommendations delivered recently by a national consensus 
dialogue (NOTE: sponsored by USAID).  He put numbers on key 
recommendations -- USD 50 million in short-term credit for 
fuel purchases and targeting the electricity subsidy to 
households consuming less that 200 kilowatt hours per month. 
 
- - In coming days the administration will take a number of 
measures to assure normal distribution of cooking gas across 
the country. 
 
INSTITUTIONS 
 
- - The country suffers serious institutional problems.  The 
dictatorship of Trujillo and the dominance of remarkable 
charismatic leaders Juan Bosch, Joaquin Balaguer, and Jose 
Francisco Pena Gomez shaped politics and restrained the 
unscrupulous and greedy.  A new generation now must take 
action against insecurity, trafficking in influence, 
clientelism, illicit enrichment, abuse of power, lack of 
respect and the general lack of seriousness. 
 
- - The executive and Congress must reconquer the respect of 
the people.  \"If the current crisis has served for anything, 
it is to utterly expose the bankruptcy of a system manifestly 
incompetent, injust, and corrupt.  Let us change it together. 
 Let us shake the tree of Dominican democracy and shake out 
the rotten fruit.\" 
 
MODERNITY, PROGRESS AND THE DIGITAL ERA 
 
- - Fernandez quoted from Alvin and Heidi Toffler\'s essay, 
\"Creation of a New Civilization,\" concerning a \"third wave\" 
of change and the arrival of a digital age.  He asserted the 
need to improve access to modern education for all Dominican 
children, including particularly to computers. 
 
- - He endorsed the concept of \"community colleges\" similar 
to those in the United States as a means of vocational 
education. 
 
- - Fernandez advocated modifications to the Dominican 
Constitution to establish economic, social and cultural 
rights. 
 
- - He wants to pass legislation on social participation, 
criminal procedure and guarantees of due process.  He wants 
to continue programs of reform to improve the central 
government, the judiciary, and the prison system; he wants to 
\"professionalize\" the executive offices involved in 
administration of justice. 
 
INTERNATIONAL FOREIGN RELATIONS 
 
- - Fernandez will pursue policies favoring peace and 
international security, reinforcing multilateral mechanisms 
in conformity with the UN and with the Organization of 
American States.  He expects to strengthen and diversify 
bilateral relations across the world, \"with special attention 
to our neighbor, Haiti.\" 
GOVERNMENT OF UNITY 
 
- - He proposes a \"government of national unity\" including a 
new Economic and Social Council with representation from 
business, labor, civil society and churches to provide 
direction to regional and provincial development authorities. 
Fernandez concluded by invoking the guidance of God and 
asserting that a \"new spirit has taken hold in our people -- 
a spirit of optimism, faith, confiance and determination.\" 
He called out a new PLD slogan, \"All of us forward together!\" 
(\"E\'palante que vamos!\" -- a variation on the popular PLD 
campaign merengue tune directed against the Mejia 
administration, \"They\'re on their way out!\" -- \"E pa\' fuera 
que van!\"). 
 
Atmospherics 
 
August 16 inaugural events were festive and formal, with 
almost all those attending formal events dressed according to 
tradition in white suits.  Newly elected President of the 
Senate Andres Bautista opened the morning ceremony with a 
stiff but earnest speech promising legislative cooperation 
with the new administration in the national interest, quoting 
John F. Kennedy\'s inaugural call, \"Ask not what your country 
can do for you but rather what you can do for your country.\" 
 
President Mejia was correct and cordial throughout the 
ceremony. He shook hands with Fernandez at the opening and 
congratulated him afterward, with a smile and a pat on the 
back -- despite stinging language in the speech that some 
might interpret as a reproach to Mejia. 
 
Fernandez\'s clarity, his admonition of the need for 
sacrifice, and his apparent mastery of the economic and 
institutional brief were sufficient to reinforce the sky-high 
expectations of Dominicans that a new day is ahead.  Most 
commentators strongly praised his speech and his messages. 
PRD-associated economist Jaime Aristy Escuder pointed out 
tartly that Fernandez had resorted to some rhetoric with 
questionable math and selective history in order to make his 
points about the seriousness of the situation, but Aristy 
nevertheless found the general approach to be sound. 
 
Fernandez was eloquent, assured, and reassuring, rarely 
looking at his notes and delivering his citations from 
memory.  He reached both the educated and the unschooled, 
using concepts, text and images in a bravado performance. 
And in the afternoon, just before the military parade, he and 
his attracive First Lady, attorney Margareta Cedeno, swept 
majestically the length of the seafront Malecon in downtown 
Santo Domingo, greeting the enthusiastic crowds from the back 
of a Cadillac convertible that dated back to the mid-1950\'s 
-- a reminder, perhaps, that the thinking man was smart 
enough to touch on the memories of the dictator who built the 
country. 
 
That was day one.  And now it\'s \"all of us forward together\" 
as we figure out how Fernandez and his team are going to deal 
with those big issues. 
 
2. Drafted by Michael Meigs 
 
3. This report, the full text in Spanish of the inaugural 
address, and other reports in our transition and elections 
series are available on our classified SIPRNET site 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/   along with 
extensive other material. 
HERTELL 
"
"20182","8/27/2004 19:59","04SANTODOMINGO4892","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE168335","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004892 
 
SIPDIS 
 
IO/T AND EB/TRA, US MISSION TO ICAO, FAA NATIONAL 
HEADQUARTERS WASHINGTON DC (AIA-100) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC, EAIR, XX 
SUBJECT: ICAO CONFERENCE DEMARCHE DELIVERED TO DOMINICAN 
CIVIL AVIATION AUTHORITIES 
 
REF: STATE 168335 
 
1. (U)  Econoff delivered reftel talking points as a 
non-paper to newly appointed Director General of Civil 
Aviation (DGAC) Norge BOTELLO Fernandez. Botello confirmed 
that the Dominican Republic will support re-election of the 
United States to the ICAO Council and in general would 
support U.S. policies concerning civil aviation.  Botello did 
not guarantee that he personally would attend the conference 
but said he would send a delegation.  Economic officer 
invited Botello to the U.S. sponsored luncheon on September 
28. 
 
2. (SBU) Comment and bio note: The GODR underwent a change of 
administrations on August 16.  President Fernandez has 
replaced all senior officials in the GODR, including those in 
civil aviation.  Botello was a former Minister of Interior 
and Police in the previous Fernandez Administration 
(1996-2000).  Botello\'s appointment is not based on any 
experience in civil aviation. He does not speak English 
fluently.  In the late 1980\'s Botello was a deputy in the 
Chamber of Deputies (lower house of Congress) for the Partido 
de la Liberacion Dominicana (PLD) and in the early 90\'s he 
served as President of the Chamber of Deputies. He was born 
on November 11, 1940 in San Pedro de Macoris. 
HERTELL 
"
"20224","8/30/2004 20:13","04SANTODOMINGO4904","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","04SANTODOMINGO4401","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 004904 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR CA/VO/L/C, WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), L/LEI (W. 
FUENTES AND M. TAYLOR); 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/29/2014 
TAGS: CVIS, CJAN, PREL, PGOV, SNAR, KCRM, DR 
SUBJECT: ADDENDUM TO REQUEST FOR CONCURRENCE IN VISA 
REVOCATION 212(A)(2)(C) (CESPEDES MARTINEZ, VICTOR MANUEL) 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 4401 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske for Reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) SUMMARY.  In reftel, Embassy requested Department\'s 
concurrence in the revocation of the B1/B2 visa of now former 
Attorney General Victor Cespedes under section 212(a)(2)(C) 
of the Immigration and Nationality Act.  Following that 
cable, just two days before leaving office, Cespedes ordered 
the early release from prison of a former Dominican 
vice-consul in Haiti who was sentenced to ten years in prison 
for trafficking 43 kilograms of cocaine.  This is yet another 
example, in our opinion, of why the visa should be revoked. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
2. (C) In July, Embassy sent reftel outlining the case for 
revocation of the B1/B2 visa of now former Attorney General 
Victor Cespedes under section 212(a)(2)(C) of the Immigration 
and Nationality Act.  Cespedes left office on August 16 when 
power transferred to a new government. 
 
3. (U) On August 14, just two days before leaving office, 
Cespedes ordered the release from prison of former Dominican 
vice-consul to Haiti Ormis Freddy Pena Mendez.  Pena was 
arrested in 2002 along with four others while trafficking 
nearly 43 kilograms of cocaine from Haiti to Santo Domingo. 
Pena was also found with 15,000 pesos (about USD 400), USD 
5,000, 16 passports (11 Haitian, four Dominican, and one 
French) and several firearms, including an Uzi.  About two 
months later, Pena was sentenced to 10 years in prison and 
ordered to pay a 50,000 peso fine (about USD 1,250). 
 
4. (U) According to news reports, Cespedes said he released 
Pena because of concerns for Pena\'s health, including 
hypertension and diabetes.  (Note: The Directorate of Prisons 
reported in July that 15% of all Dominican prisoners have 
hypertension.)  At this point Pena had served less than two 
years of his sentence. In a radio interview on August 25 
Cespedes was unable to recall the details of the health 
justification for the release. 
 
5. (U) In addition, only hours before the change of 
government the Attorney General\'s office ordered that 
prisoner Martiza Aquino be released on medical grounds. 
Aquino is accused of carrying 129 bags of heroin in her 
stomach. 
 
6. (U)  On August 26 new Attorney General Dominguez Brito 
ordered the return to jail of Pena and Aquino and announced a 
formal investigation into the release of prisoners for health 
reasons.  He said that his office was investigating 
apparently unjustified additions to the list of prisoners 
recommended for pardons, indicating that the changes had been 
made in the Attorney General\'s office.  The new Attorney 
General has placed a formal prohibition upon Cespedes from 
leaving the country (a precautionary measure also taken in 
regard to a number of other Mejia administration officials). 
 
7. (C) COMMENT.  Cespedes has a record of releasing known 
drug traffickers (see reftel).  When viewed as part of a 
pattern of behavior, the Pena and Aquino cases reinforce the 
argument set forth in reftel, which is that Cespedes has 
aided, abetted, conspired or colluded in trafficking 
activities and that revocation of his visa is proper.  END 
COMMENT. 
KUBISKE 
"
"20225","8/30/2004 20:39","04SANTODOMINGO4916","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04SECSTATE176535","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 004916 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC EDUARDO J. MARTINEZ; EB/ENERGY; 
DEPT PASS DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY; SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/25/2014 
TAGS: EPET, ENRG, ECON, PREL, XK 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC AND VENEZUELAN OIL 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 176535 
 
     B. SANTO DOMINGO 04719 
 
Classified By: ECOPOL Counselor Michael Meigs for reasons 1.4 (b,d) 
 
1. (U)  This cable is an overview of the Dominican Republic\'s 
petroleum sector in response to reftel A.  Venezuela in 2003 
supplied only 11 percent of total petroleum imports to the 
Dominican Republic, a significant change from 2002 when 
Venezuelan imports were nearly 55 percent of the total. 
Other key suppliers include U.S. (28 percent), Mexico (18.4 
percent), Colombia (11.4 percent) and Trinidad and Tobago (10 
percent). (see chart at the end of cable) 
 
2. (U)  Petroleum and San Jose/Caracas Accords. Though the 
supply of petroleum shifted to other sources, principally due 
to Venezuelan supply shortages in 2003, the Dominican 
Republic has long been a market for Venezuelan petroleum.  It 
used San Jose and Caracas Accord provisions in 2003-2004 to 
finance high voltage tension lines and to purchase products 
with which to improve sports facilities.  Melania Bautista, 
Undersecretary for International Cooperation in the Technical 
Secretariat of the Presidency, gave specifics: USD 23.9 
 
SIPDIS 
million for transmission lines, USD 37.2 million for sports 
facilities related to the 2003 Pan American Games and USD 
400,000 for the purchase of micro-mini buses manufactured in 
Venezuela.  Three projects for transmission lines and traffic 
signals have been scheduled for 2004, but have not yet been 
approved.  In a similar context, Miguel Cocco, new head of 
Dominican customs, remarked in June 2004 that the Dominican 
government did not have any success using San Jose Accord 
credits from Mexico in the early 1980\'s because of the 
difficulties working with the Mexican Foreign Trade Bank 
(FOMEX). 
 
3. (C)  On August 6, President Leonel Fernandez commented to 
embassy the Ambassador (ref b) that he had secured promises 
from President Chavez of Venezuela of extremely favorable 
terms for oil imports -- a credit line for purchases of 
Venezuelan oil at half the world price, with no payments due 
for six months and an offer of a USD 250 million loan. 
Fernandez looks to use these terms to stabilize Dominican 
finances and provide financing to the electric sector to deal 
with chronic fuel shortages and payment problems. 
 
4. (C)  Despite the prospect of Dominican imports of low 
priced Venezuelan crude, we do not expect President Fernandez 
to make significant policy shifts with respect to Venezuela. 
Fernandez is friendly with Chavez but does not share Chavez\'s 
populist approach or Chavez\'s antagonism toward the United 
States.  Fernandez has twice told embassy officers that the 
key reference points for the Dominican Republic are \"New 
York, Washington, Miami, and Madrid.\"  Although short-term 
relief thanks to Venezuelan oil concessions is welcome, the 
Fernandez administration shows every sign of dealing 
seriously with its financial imbalances and with the IMF, in 
expectations of an economic turnaround over the next 12-24 
months.  Even with oil, Chavez will have relatively little 
leverage as long as this scenario remains feasible. 
 
5. (U) Following is a chart showing the Dominican Republic\'s 
imports by source of 5.26 million barrels of refined and 
unrefined petroleum in 2003. 
 
Dominican Petroleum Imports, 2002-2003 
- - - - - 
Year                        2002 
2003 
- - - - - 
Volume (bbl)           50,090,123                 47,421,453 
- - - - 
Cost (USD)             1,297,029,291            1,428,933,161 
- - - - - 
USD/bbl                  25.89                          30.13 
- - - - 
Percent of total imports (by volume) from: 
- - - - 
Venezuela           55 pct                     11 pct 
------------------------------------------ 
USA                  NA                           28 pct 
----------------------------------------- 
Mexico             NA                           18.4 pct 
---------------------------------------- 
Colombia           NA                          11.4 pct 
---------------------------------------- 
Trinidad-Tobago      NA                   10 pct 
--------------------------------------- 
 
Dominican Petroleum Imports from Venezuela, 2003-2003 
--------------------------------------- 
Year          2002                    2003 
--------------------------------------- 
Vol Crude  (bbl)    7,699,348                 1,798,997 
-------------------------------------- 
Vol refined        19,663,538              3,460,965 
----------------------------------- 
Total bbl/day          74,966                    14,410 
----------------------------------- 
KUBISKE 
"
"20358","9/3/2004 18:38","04SANTODOMINGO4986","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 004986 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR G/TIP, WHA/PPC (FALLS), WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/02/2014 
TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, KJUS, SMIG, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: RAMOS GARCIA ALIEN SMUGGLING 
TRIAL BEGINS IN EARNEST 
 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske for Reason 1.4(b) and (d) 
 
1. (U) On 1 September 2004, the Supreme Court in regular 
session began hearing testimony in the alien smuggling trial 
of Congressional representative Guillermo Radhames Ramos 
Garcia.  Because Ramos Garcia is a legislator, the Supreme 
Court is the court of first instance.  Ramos, a former consul 
to Cape Haitien, Haiti, and three co-defendants are accused 
of smuggling 16 East Asians across the Haiti-Dominican 
Republic border.  Ramos was charged in 2000, but the case has 
moved slowly due to several procedural delays. 
 
2. (U) A panel of 12 Supreme Court justices decided to begin 
the trial even though seven witnesses did not appear (a July 
hearing was postponed when several witnesses failed to show). 
 The court heard testimony from the police lieutenant coronel 
who headed the investigation, from the migration inspector at 
the point where Ramos crossed the border, and from former 
Director of Migration Miguel Vasquez. Both prosecutor and 
defense attorney cross-examined.  After four hours the 
justices adjourned until October 4. 
 
3. (U) The two Asian co-defendents, free on bail since March, 
have filed a civil suit against former Director of Migration 
Miguel Vasquez, alleging that he and others misappropriated 
USD 44,000 they were carrying when arrested. 
 
4. (C) Prosecutor Servio Tulio Castanos told poloff he does 
not expect the missing witnesses to appear.  However, the 
court can, at its discretion, admit previous testimony from 
these witnesses taken in a lower court before Ramos became a 
congressman.  Newly appointed Assistant Attorney General 
Frank Soto, with responsibility for cases of trafficking in 
persons, believes that the justices are allowing witnesses 
one final chance to appear but will be ready on October 4 if 
necessary to consider their previous testimony.  Soto views 
the relatively short continuance as an indication that the 
court is serious about reaching a resolution in this case. 
 
5. (C) COMMENT.  The opening of testimony converts a 
long-running non-trial into an event with considerable media 
attention and possible political impact.  The Fernandez 
administration has assigned the case and the responsibility 
for prosecuting trafficking to  experienced attorneys. 
KUBISKE 
"
"20408","9/7/2004 17:30","04SANTODOMINGO5024","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","04SANTODOMINGO5017","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 005024 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
USDA FOR ITP - SHEIKH AND GRUNENFELDER, REPEATING SANTO 
DOMINGO 5017 DTG 07 1326 SEP 04 SENT ACTION GENEVA, WHITE 
HOUSE FOR USTR, SECSTATE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/06/2010 
TAGS: PGOV, ETRD, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN POLITICS: SUGAR, IPR, TAXES AND TRADE -- 
TROUBLE FOR FREE TRADERS 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 5017 
 
Classified By: EcoPol counselor Michael Meigs.  Reason: 1.4 (a) and (d) 
. 
 
1. (U) Following is the first in our series on the politics 
of the new Dominican administration of Leonel Fernandez. 
 
(U) Dominican Politics #1: Sugar, IPR, Taxes and Trade ) 
Trouble for Free Traders 
 
(U) Powerful opponents of free trade are mounting a campaign 
to discredit the agreement with the United States and the 
Central Americans, manipulating Congress and hoping the USG 
will walk away from the deal.  Leonel Fernandez needs to stop 
talking generalities and make a commitment to free trade. 
 
(U) The enormously wealthy and influential sugar interests in 
the Dominican Republic have pursued a relentless public 
campaign over the past month against the country,s free 
trade agreement (FTA) with the United States and Central 
America.  At a rhythm of two or three per week, full-page ads 
of breath-taking vehemence have appeared, simultaneously, in 
all the country,s dailies.  Some have appeared as 
communiqus of the \"Agricultural Association\" of two dozen 
agricultural interest groups.  Others were re-publications of 
anti-trade opinion pieces from elsewhere in the press.  Still 
others have been ad hominem attacks against the Dominican 
negotiators, the U.S. ambassador, and those few editorialists 
who have written in favor of the FTA. 
 
(SBU) The arguments are the familiar rants of protectionism: 
the FTA will completely eliminate the agriculture of the 
country, now more than 20 percent of GDP.  The United States 
unfairly subsidizes its farmers and exports.  The country 
will lose autonomy in food protection.  Millions of poor 
farmers will lose their livelihoods.  The Dominican 
negotiators failed to consider the needs of agriculture.  The 
FTA must be renegotiated, and the U.S. elections will present 
the opportunity to do so. 
 
Where is Leonel? 
 
(U) In his first public event, the day after his 
inauguration, President Fernandez endorsed the FTA to the 
press, in the presence of U.S. Secretary of Agriculture Ann 
Veneman.  He reminded journalists,\"&The Dominican Republic 
cannot afford to lose access to the U.S. market, and for that 
reason the agreement was concluded, with no time limits to 
free trade\"  The Caribbean Basin Initiative \"is what has 
permitted the development of our free zone industries\"  He 
declared that the agreement would advance regional 
integration and benefit the country: \"We are greatly 
confident that the future development of the Dominican 
Republic may rest in the ability to take advantage of the 
opportunities presented to us.\" 
 
(SBU) Fernandez has long espoused just this sort of soft 
globalism, talking about the inevitability of trade pressures 
and about the need to seek competitive advantage. 
Unfortunately, he has, in our view, so far failed in his 
first three weeks in power to appoint or empower free traders 
in his administration. 
 
(SBU) Foreign Minister Carlos Morales Troncoso is straight 
out of 40 years of managing and owning Central Romana, the 
country,s leading sugar complex - - although, to be fair, 
the Minister told the Ambassador on August 24 that he was 
\"setting aside\"his concerns about sugar and trade.  Trade 
negotiating authority has moved back to the Foreign Ministry, 
to Juan Giuiliani, not known to favor U.S. trade initiatives 
for the hemisphere.  Minister of Commerce and Industry 
Francisco Javier Garcia manifested no particular interest in 
the FTA during the Ambassador,s courtesy call on August 23, 
dwelling instead on domestic concerns.  Agriculture Minister 
Anibal Romero says that agricultural complaints must be 
heard.  Though certainly peripheral to these issues, even 
Culture Minister Rafael Lantigua is close to the sugar 
interests. 
 
(C) Uncertainty about Fernandez,s trade policy is such that 
last week USTR picked up rumors that Fernandez might 
reappoint as WTO ambassador Federico Cuello, the determined 
anti-U.S. ideologist who has regularly sniped at the FTA 
effort in weekly newspaper columns over the last year. 
Secretary of the Presidency Temistocles Montas dismissed the 
 
SIPDIS 
notion in conversation with the Charge on September 3 (we 
understand Cuello is likely to go to Brussels, where he can 
do little to harm trade).  Montas offered no speculation 
about a possible nominee for Geneva. 
Congress - - A Field for Provocation 
 
(U) The highest-profile political show in town has been 
congressional consideration of the tax package crafted by 
Fernandez,s advisors and delivered on July 11, at arm,s 
length, by President Mejia.  All political actors understand 
that early implementation of increased taxes is a prior 
condition for renewing IMF negotiations for a badly needed 
standby program.  House Finance Committee president Rep. 
Marino Collantes conducted more than a month of hearings, 
debates, and discussions on the measure, right until 
expiration of the session on Sunday, August 15.  The House 
revived the legislation as soon as it reconvened in new 
session after the inauguration. 
 
(SBU) Also expiring on the 15th and revived on the 17th was 
an ugly little measure advocated by pharmaceutical 
manufacturers. In direct breach of commitments in the WTO and 
the FTA, a piece of draft legislation would reduce penalties 
on infringements of patents and trademarks to fines of 
derisory amount, at the same time eliminating jail terms.  It 
would also stipulate that petitions for compulsory licensing 
of patents would be considered approved in the absence of 
administrative reply within 120 days.  In the week before the 
inauguration the DCM and EcoPol Counselor strongly cautioned 
House President Pacheco about both aspects.  Pacheco, 
generally a reliable interlocutor, assured us he would see 
that the measure was held in committee for lengthy discussion. 
 
(SBU) The House passed a much-reduced tax package on August 
26, but with a sharp protectionist sting in its tail.  In 
paragraph IX of the approved version a new measure would 
impose a 25 percent tax on soft drinks and refreshments 
manufactured with fructose syrups.  This text had gone into 
the hopper late in the closing deliberations.  On August 27 
House President Pacheco expressed dismay to us, professing 
that he,d not understood it to constitute trade 
protectionism. 
 
(SBU) The tax package then went to the Dominican Senate, 
dominated by Meja,s PRD with 28 of 32 senators.  On Monday, 
August 30 EcoPol counselor explained the consequences of the 
anti-trade tactic to PRD president Vicente Sanchez Baret and, 
separately, to PRD Trade Committee president Sen. Alejandro 
Santos, also of the PRD. 
 
(C) On the same day the Charge called on Senate President 
Andres Bautista, who had apparently been ducking calls from 
the U.S. Agricultural Attache for three days.  Sen. Bautista 
was flanked by a committee of senators, including  Santos. 
The Charge warned them of immediate, wide-reaching 
consequences for the FTA if an anti-fructose tax became law. 
Bautista professed concern but commented that any 
modifications would necessarily send the package back to the 
House and further delays, prejudicial for prospects with the 
IMF.  Perhaps, he speculated, Congress could approve the 
package and then pass a separate measure to repeal the 
anti-fructose tax.  The Charge strongly warned senators 
against the tactic, advising them that the anti-trade 
paragraph had already greatly damaged the credibility of the 
country with the USG, the U.S. Congress, and supporters of 
free trade. 
 
(U) When the Senate met on August 31, it referred the tax 
package to a special committee of 12 senators - - far larger 
than the 5-senator committee previously planned, according to 
Senator Santos.  That committee met formally on September 2; 
during their session the Embassy delivered individually to 
each of the 12 senators the Embassy translation of a etter 
sent on August 31 from Deputy USTR Algier to Dominican 
ambassador Guiliani Cury. 
 
(C) The USTR letter expressing deep concern about the tax 
measure drew in part from elements proposed by Embassy Santo 
Domingo. Shortly after the letter was delivered to the 
Dominican embassy, their DCM in Washington Judith Marcano 
(protect) telephoned Santo Domingo trade contacts asking for 
help, saying that Amb. Guiliani was declining to deal with 
USTR, with the USTR letter, or with any of the approaches 
from U.S. interests. 
 
Senate Debate 
(U) The Senate is sharply divided, according to the press, 
with Senate vice president Cesar Matias strongest for 
elimination of the anti-trade measure.  Matias stated during 
debate that since the administration is responsible for the 
tax package, Fernandez should declare his position on the 
issue. 
 
(U) Journalists are portraying the drama as one of Senate 
reaction to \"pressures from the U.S. Embassy.\"To their 
inquiries the Embassy issued a succinct reply:  \"he United 
States Embassy regularly carries out consultations with all 
parts of the Dominican government, including the House of 
Representatives and the Senate, on a wide range of matters of 
mutual interest.  We share the interest of the Dominican 
government in obtaining an appropriate package of fiscal 
reforms, consistent with the international obligations of the 
Dominican Republic, in order to put the Dominican economy 
back on the road to recovery.\" 
 
(C) On September 3 Technical Secretary of the Presidency 
Temistocles Montas opened a pre-Paris-Club meeting with 
Charge and EcoPol counselor with word that Senate President 
Bautista had raised the issue with the administration - - 
evidently with the suggestion that the tax package might go 
through unchanged if Fernandez asked for it.  Montas took no 
position, as Charge again detailed the consequences of 
allowing the anti-fructose tax to become law, even with a 
perhaps a promise, perhaps unachievable, that it would be 
repealed.  EcoPol counselor warned that congressional 
approval of the protectionist tax might prompt the USG to 
suspend action on the DR and proceed only with CAFTA. 
 
The Losers, Strategy 
 
(SBU) Sugar producers and pharmaceutical manufacturers see 
that they are the losers under the free trade agreement. 
Sugar cannot use the additional quota of 10,000 tons for the 
United States, because they can scarcely produce the 180,000 
now authorized. The pharmaceutical producers know that 
effective enforcement of intellectual property laws will bar 
their plans to dominate the local market. 
 
(C) Therefore the direct and immediate interest of both 
groups is to sabotage DR-CAFTA.  Their first tactic was to 
shift perceptions, making the U.S. government, the U.S. 
ambassador, and the Embassy the villains of the piece.  The 
intemperate rhetoric of their advertising sought to provoke a 
USG response, which would give them further material for 
polarizing opinion against the agreement.  Leading sugar 
owner Pepe Fanjul, with production both in the Dominican 
Republic and in Florida, is putting about the story that the 
Embassy is revoking visas of supporters of the sugar sector - 
- a patent absurdity, but one that Dominicans, with their 
conspiracy theories of bilateral relations, would be eager to 
swallow. 
 
(SBU) Their second tactic has been to poison Dominican law 
and regulations with trade-unfriendly measures that might 
prompt the United States openly to walk away from the deal. 
USTR could decide not to submit to the U.S. Congress only the 
trade agreement negotiated with the Central (CAFTA).  If that 
happened, it would be the culmination of a process that may 
already have started  -- with U.S. supporters in the private 
sector and in Congress estimating that Dominicans will never 
be able to deliver on their commitments. 
 
(SBU) Against the fictions and malevolent ruses of these 
opponents, the most powerful potential force is Dominican 
self-interest. President Fernandez has not convincingly 
articulated the national interest in this trade deal and too 
few Dominicans have spoken up in defense of it.  For example, 
the public appears to have no idea that it is paying double 
the world price for its principal staple, rice, or that 
cartels of protected producer-importers of agricultural goods 
are routinely gouging the public and especially the poor. 
 
 (SBU) The Dominican industrialists most capable of cashing 
in on new export opportunities contributed generously to the 
Leonel Fernandez presidential campaign.  But they have done 
very little, either individually or collectively, to counter 
the tactics of the sugar lobby, a group everyone perceives to 
be motivated and wealthy enough to purchase congressional 
votes wholesale.  Similarly, associations, civic leaders and 
economists who understand the advantages of the agreement 
have been intimidated by the ferocity of the agricultural 
counterattack.  The American Chamber of Commerce leadership 
endorses the FTA in general terms but has not engaged in this 
fight, largely because sugar interests are influential 
members who regularly contribute to the Chamber and its 
programs. 
 
(U) The struggle over the FTA will provide early tests for 
Leonel Fernandez:  of his understanding of economic advantage 
in the modern world and of his ability to articulate a vision 
of the path to growth, transformation and modernization of 
the economy.  And even more so, of his willingness to take on 
the privileged and protected, in the interests of those who 
elected him. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Michael Meigs 
3. (U) This cable and other cables in our various series on 
the Dominican Republic, along with extensive other material, 
can be consulted on our classified SIPRNET site 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/   . 
HERTELL 
"
"20519","9/10/2004 17:59","04SANTODOMINGO5080","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04SANTODOMINGO5024","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 005080 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/OMA 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON; USTR FOR VARGO 
USDA FOR ITP - SHEIKH AND GRUNENFELDER 
LABOR FOR ILAB; TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/26/2009 
TAGS: PGOV, ETRD, EFIN, PREL, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN SENATORS TELL AMBASSADOR THEY\'LL BLOCK 
TAX ON FRUCTOSE SYRUP 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 5024 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Hans Hertell.  Reason: 1.4 (a) and (d). 
 
 1. (C) Summary. The Ambassador obtained from Senate and PRD 
leaders September 8 a commitment to delete a proposed 25 
percent tax on beverages using imported high fructose corn 
syrup (HFCS) from paragraph 9 of the pending fiscal reform 
legislation (reftel).  The Ambassador told them the 
protectionist tax, if passed, would close the door to the 
Dominican Republic\'s free trade agreement (FTA) with the 
United States.  Senate President Andres Bautista (opposition 
PRD), PRD president Vicente Sanchez Baret, and special 
committee for tax reform chair Senator Tomas Duran (PRD) said 
that the Senate -- with its overwhelming PRD majority -- 
would strike the tax from the fiscal reform bill on September 
13 or 14 and immediately send their version to the House of 
Representatives.  On September 9 on the margins of a courtesy 
call by Eximbank Vice President Jeffrey Miller (septel) the 
Ambassador urged Fernandez to support revision of the bill. 
House Chairman Alfredo Pacheco has told the press that the 
House would, if asked, pass separate legislation repealing 
the HFCS tax if it is included in the tax package.  End 
summary. 
 
-------------- 
Their Position 
-------------- 
 
2. (C) On September 8 Senate President Andres Bautista 
(opposition PRD) requested on short notice a meeting to 
discuss the tax reform package and USG requests to eliminate 
a 25 percent tax aimed at imported fructose syrups.  The 
Ambassador received Bautista, along with PRD party president 
Vicente Sanchez Baret and PRD Senator Tomas Duran, chair of 
the 12-person special committee discussing the tax bill. 
 
3.  (C) Bautista said that after GODR officials and 
legislators had received word last week from Embassy oficers 
of Washington\'s objections to the HFCS tax included at the 
last minute by the House of Representatives (reftel), on 
September 7 during three hours of Senate hearings, Finance 
Secretary Vicente Bengoa, Internal Revenue Director Juan 
 
SIPDIS 
Hernandez, and Customs Director Miguel Cocco suggested the 
Senate approve the bill as is, including paragraph 9, and 
send it back to forward to the President. The Fernandez 
administration would submit a separate bill that, once passed 
by both Congressional houses and signed into law, would 
repeal the provisions of paragraph 9 from the already 
approved fiscal reform law.  Bautista emphasized the 
Dominicans\' priority of getting the tax reform operational as 
soon as possible both for revenue reasons and to  enable 
progress toward a renewed IMF accord. 
 
------------ 
Our Position 
------------ 
 
4. (C) The Ambassador spoke \"as a friend of the Dominican 
Republic, without any intention of exerting pressure.\"  He 
explained that senior Washington officials were dismayed by 
the proposed HFCS tax, which was counter to the WTO 
agreements and against the spirit and letter of the FTA. 
USTR, part of the President\'s White House office, was 
emphatic in this view.  Ratification of CAFTA was moving 
ahead, but a Dominican protectionist tax measure would throw 
a huge obstacle in the road to DR-CAFTA approval.  The HFCS 
conflict was a clash of interests between Dominican private 
sector entities, the sugar producers and the bottlers.  The 
Ambassador advised them that Congress \"has the key\" to FTA 
ratification.\" He emphasized,\"You can open the door to the 
FTA, or you can slam it shut for good.\" 
 
---------------- 
A Position Taken 
---------------- 
 
5.  (C) Bautista, seconded by Sanchez Baret, replied, \"We are 
not going to put the FTA at risk.  If the tax would do that, 
then we won\'t accept it.\"  He said he would convoke the 
Senate on September 14, or -- at the Ambassador\'s suggestion 
-- possibly on September 13, and place before Senators a 
modified bill without the tax provision for approval on an 
urgent basis in two consecutive readings.  The revised bill 
would go back to the House by the evening of September 14. 
Sanchez Baret said that the PRD would instruct its senators 
(a majority in the Senate) and congressional representatives 
(a plurality of 72 of 150 in the Chamber) to support this 
revision.  Duran expressed a desire for President Fernandez 
to take a clear position on the matter.  Sanchez Baret noted 
that, if Fernandez supported the change and so instructed the 
PLD\'s 42 deputies, then the final legislation \"would not 
fail\" to gain approval.  However, if the Chamber rejected the 
revision, the GODR would have to originate a completely new 
fiscal reform bill, which would be open to further lobbying 
and modifications in both houses of Congress. 
 
-------------------------- 
The President\'s Reluctance 
-------------------------- 
 
6.  (C) In a subsequent private conversation with President 
Fernandez on September 8, the Ambassador urged him to support 
passage of the fiscal reform without the HFCS tax provision. 
The President initially objected that U.S. corn producers 
should not be able to influence sovereign decisions of the 
Dominican Republic.  The Ambassador replied that much more 
was at stake, including the highest interests of the nation. 
Fernandez appeared to accept his argument, although 
reluctantly. 
 
------------ 
Other Allies 
------------ 
 
7.  (SBU) The same day, House President Alfredo Pacheco (PRD) 
told the press that in his opinion the Chamber would accept a 
bill to repeal the HFCS tax, to avoid any confrontation that 
could harm the social or economic development of the country. 
 This played in the leading daily September 9 opposite a 
statement by influential Senator Jose Hazim Frappier, former 
PRSC vice presidential candidate from a sugar province, 
condemning free trade in sweeteners as a form of \"hari-kiri\" 
for the local industry.  The American Chamber of Commerce 
broke its silence and wrote in strong terms to the Senate, 
asking that the HFCS tax be eliminated as contrary to WTO 
agreements and to the FTA. 
 
-------- 
Comment 
-------- 
 
8.  (SBU)  Bautista is holding open hearings on the tax 
reform bill and as of Friday, September 10, there is no 
indication in the press of the intentions of the Senate 
leadership.  The Ambassador\'s September 9 courtesy call on 
Agriculture Minister Amilcar Romero, previously scheduled, 
provided an opportunity for sugar supporters to vent and 
journalists to speculate about \"blackmail\" by the United 
States.  The Ambassador\'s comments to the press afterwards 
were that the country has the obligtion to comply with its 
undertakings in the FTA; the issue has many repercussions and 
the Dominican Republic \"has the key in hand\" to solve its 
difficulties. 
 
9.  (SBU) The Ambassador and staff will continue to maintain 
a low public profile on this issue, waiting for it to play 
out in Congress and the executive, in the expectation that 
participants now undertand that the country\'s best interests 
lie in avoiding a self-defeating protectionist gambit and in 
separating consideration of tax reform from consideration of 
the FTA. 
HERTELL 
"
"20641","9/15/2004 14:05","04SANTODOMINGO5150","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE194151","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005150 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, KSCA, TBIO, OSCI 
SUBJECT: REQUEST FOR ASSESSMENT OF FOREIGN POLICY 
IMPLICATIONS OF A PROPOSED RESEARCH PROJECT NO. 5 P30 
AI45008 INVOLVING FOREIGN INSTITUTIONS. 
 
REF: SECSTATE 194151 
 
 1.  Embassy Santo Domingo has no foreign policy objection to 
proposed research. 
KUBISKE 
"
"20655","9/15/2004 18:46","04SANTODOMINGO5153","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SANTODOMINGO596","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005153 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EB/CIP AMB GROSS, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC; 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS, BEXP, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN TAX REFORM AND TELECOMS 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 0596 
 
1.  Embassy Santo Domingo thanks Department for information 
about meeting on September 7 with Verizon concerning the tax 
package currently before the Dominican congress, as well as 
the September 14 message detailing efforts to date by 
telecoms companies in Santo Domingo. 
2.  The Ambassador received Verizon president Jorge Ivan 
Ramirez at short notice on August 24 on this subject. 
Ramirez outlined concerns of all telecoms firms concerning 
the proposal to enact an excise tax of 10 percent on telecoms 
services; he described the industry counterproposal of an 
excise tax of 6 percent and a lowering of the \"telecoms 
development tax\" from 2 percent to 1 percent.  Ramirez 
stressed the firms\' view that the demand for their services 
is elastic, and the 10 percent tax would not be likely to 
collect any more revenue than the lower tax proposed by the 
companies.  A lower tax would have fewer adverse effects on 
demand, system development, and company earnings. He left a 
one-page paper outlining these concerns. 
 
3.  The next day, during his courtesy call on newly appointed 
Finance Minister Vicente Bengoa, the Ambassador outlined 
these concerns to the Minister, particularly noting the 
projected revenue scenarios.  The Minister heard him out but 
made no comment on the administration\'s approach to the bill. 
 
4.  Submitting a tax proposal to COngress was a July 
requirement of the currently inactive IMF agreement.  The 
proposal was jointly elaborated by PLD and PRD last June and 
delivered to the House of Representatives on July 11.  The 
House was in continuous session until August 15 on the 
subject, conducting public hearings and gathering comments; 
the contents of the package were altered substantially during 
this process, both by the administration drafters and by the 
House. We understand that the telecoms firms argued for the 6 
percent telecoms tax alternative and were expecting that the 
House would accept their approach. 
 
5.  The House reconvened after the August 16 inauguration, 
and after further hearings the House approved its modified 
version on September 2.  The House retained the 10 percent 
tax.  The bill has been in the Senate since that date; it was 
voted out of committee on September 14, without change, and 
approved by the full Senate that day in the first of two 
required votes. The Senate is scheduled to meet next of 
September 16 to decide whether to finish consideration of the 
bill. 
 
6.  The USG is working with both the executive and the 
legislative branches in the Dominican Republic, stressing 
that the version now before the Senate should be modified and 
returned to the House for further consideration. The Charge 
and embassy officers have conveyed this view to the president 
of the Senate, to the head of the PRD party, which controls 
the Senate, and to the president of the Senate Trade 
Committee.  Further contacts are scheduled.  If the Senate 
does modify and return the current bill, the House may accept 
Senate modications, kill the bill, or originate an 
alternative version.  If on the other hand the Senate 
approves the House draft of bill, the legislation is 
submitted to the President for his consideration during a 
period of 8 days.  The President may object to all or part of 
it and return it to congress; he may aprove; or he may make 
no comment, in which case the bill becomes law. 
KUBISKE 
"
"20656","9/15/2004 18:47","04SANTODOMINGO5154","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 005154 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/OMA; DEPT PASS 
EXIMBANK; NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB; USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD;TREASURY FOR 
OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/15/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN PRESIDENT AND ECON TEAM SEEK TO REASSURE 
EXIMBANK 
 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske.  Reason:  1.4 (a) and (d). 
 
1. (U) Summary: During the September 8 visit of EXIMBANK Vice 
President David Miller Dominican President Fernandez and his 
advisors stressed that the country,s economic crisis was one 
of liquidity rather than insolvency.  They indicated their 
commitment to meeting the country\'s debt obligations and 
added  that much planning is needed to achieve a solution. 
Fernandez said optimistically that he sees three steps to 
solving short term liquidity  problems, so he can get on with 
the development plans from his first   administration.  End 
summary. 
 
2.  (U) EXIMBANK Senior VP for Finance Jeffrey Miller and 
Senior VP for Credit and Risk Assessment John McAdams 
accompanied the Ambassador on September 8 to  call on Finance 
Secretary Vicente Bengoa and Central Bank Governor Hector 
 
SIPDIS 
Valdez Albizu before meeting with President Fernandez.  The 
Ambassador hosted a lunch for Ex-Im officials to meet local 
business leaders. 
 
---------------------------- 
Our country is not insolvent 
---------------------------- 
 
3. (SBU) Finance Secretary Vicente Bengoa said that the 
Dominican Republic,s economic crisis does not reflect 
insolvency, but rather signifies that the country is facing a 
liquidity problem.  He said that devaluation of the peso 
caused an adjustment in the current account, traditionally 
running in deficit  and offset by strong foreign investment 
shown in the capital account.   Investment has diminished 
sharply since the crisis began.  Bengoa commented that the 
root of the problem is a shortage of pesos in the country, 
and that  the solution is tax reform designed to raise peso 
revenues. 
 
4.  (SBU) On the topic of its debt troubles, Bengoa said that 
debt ceiling will  be renegotiated with IMF.  He had no 
specifics to offer, indicating that the  new government is 
still in the planning stages on its approach.  He said that 
the GODR would shortly be sending a mission to the IMF, which 
would include  himself, the Central Bank Governor Hector 
Valdez Albizu, and staff of the 
President. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Priorities and help from private banks 
--------------------------------------- 
 
5.  (SBU) Central Bank Governor Hector Valdez Albizu said 
without elaboration  that funds that were earmarked for 
service of international debt \"were not used  for the stated 
purpose by the previous government.\" The consequences are 
evident in the current crisis. Valdez Albizu said the 
administration must set  up priorities, the first being to 
normalize streams of payments to creditors.   The Governor 
reiterated Finance Secretary Bengoa,s message that the 
problem was 
one of liquidity rather than one of solvency, and said that 
while tax reform  was part of the answer to the country\'s 
problems, funds from private investors  could be a more 
immediate source of relief. 
 
6.  (SBU) The solution for avoiding immediate default, Valdez 
Albizu commented, was to turn to private banks.  There were 
local investors willing to offer assistance in the form of 
cash to be deposited in the Central Bank; the Bank has 
already received commitments of USD 125 million.  He sees 
this potential assistance from commercial banks as the best 
hope to resolve the immediate liquidity problem.  These funds 
could meet the \"comparability of treatment\" 
criteria of the Paris Club, he said, and the only other 
alternative would default.  When asked about prospects for 
default, Valdez Albizu responded that the \"Central Bank 
supports the urgency of paying its debts to investors.\" 
(NOTE: That same day and the following morning local Citibank 
manager Ignacio Jasminoy urgently asked EcoPol counselor 
whether the administration had expressed its intention to 
accept the banks\' offer.  He, for one, is waiting for a firm 
signal. Citi would put together a package for up to two years 
at 12 pct per annum.) 
 
---------------------------- 
Who is responsible for debt? 
---------------------------- 
 
7.  (U) Both Finance Secretary Bengoa and President Fernndez 
confirmed newspaper reports that effective October 1 the 
responsibility for managing debt payments will be shifted 
from the Central Bank to the Secretary of Finance, where it 
has traditionally remained.  Central Bank Governor Valdez 
Albizu commented shortly that the responsibility was \"shared, 
and both the Bank and the Ministry would be responsible for 
paying the debts. 
 
---------------------------------- 
New bonds and oil but no new debt 
---------------------------------- 
 
8.  (SBU) President Fernandez was alone with the visitors 
throughout their 75-minute discussion with him.  He said that 
his administration would focus on three steps to extricate 
the DR from its tight spot while avoiding taking on 
additional debt.  The first was the assistance mentioned by 
both Bengoa and Valdez Albizu, to come in the form of cash 
from private investors.  Fernandez says he believes that the 
administration should be able to raise USD 500 million in 
relatively short order.  He had met with representatives of 
financial advisors Bear Stearns to discuss a swap of USD 500 
million in ,06 bonds for bonds with a maturity date of 2011. 
 He expects to issue new bonds at the same rate of interest, 
and he argued that bondholders would be willing to accept the 
later maturity date rather than face the country\'s immediate 
default. 
 
9.  (C) The third step and most significant source of funds 
suggested by Fernndez would come from a proposal already 
been made to the government of Venezuela. Referring to the 
San Jose Pact under which Mexico and Venezuela have been 
selling oil to various Central American and Caribbean nations 
since 1980, he said the administration has proposed that 
Venezuela provide oil at a 25 percent discount off market 
price and finance the remaining 75 percent at favorable terms 
over 15 years.  Fernndez asserted that this would not 
increase Dominican debt, as the equivalent of the financed 
amount would be deposited in the Central Bank to bolster 
reserves and to assist in managing the money supply. 
Fernandez said that the deal will be worth about $750 million 
over six months, or USD 1.5 billion over a year.  The 
Venezuelans have not yet accepted 
the proposal. 
 
------------ 
We will pay 
------------ 
 
10.  (SBU) At each meeting, Ex-Im officials stressed the 
importance of clearing arrears of between 9 and 12 million to 
EXIMBANK.  If these amounts are not paid in the next several 
weeks, Ex-Im will shut down all activity in the Dominican 
Republic.  Each Dominican interlocutor strongly asserted that 
the government would pay before the deadline.  President 
Fernandez was adamant that the government \"should pay right 
away.\" 
 
11.  (SBU) Miller raised the topic of five pending projects 
worth $130 million, ready for signature at Ex-Im.  Loans for 
three water projects, improvements for a hospital and funding 
for a gold mine projectwere previously authorized by the 
Dominican Congress, but Mejia administration indicated that 
they planned to cancel the loan requests. The cancellation 
letter was never sent. Neither Bengoa nor Valdez could 
respond, but President Fernandez was familiar with each 
project.  He asked for the water projects go forward but 
decided to cancel the other two as too costly. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Energy and a vision for the future 
----------------------------------- 
 
12.  (SBU) Regarding the energy sector and its capitalization 
problems, Fernandez said his strategy is to assure an 
uninterrupted supply of electricity - - no blackouts - - and 
then to raise electricity tariffs.  His staff had met with 
investors interested in transporting to the Dominican 
Republic two partially completed coal-fired electric plants 
now located in Houston. Each plant has a capacity of 70 
megawatts and can be on line in one year, as opposed to the 
five years to build a plant. (He did not explain how the 
additional capacity would help resolve a cash-flow problem; 
current installed capacity in the Dominican Republic is more 
than adequate to meet current demand.) 
 
13. (SBU) Regarding future projects, President Fernandez 
noted that he wants \"to build what is good for the country, 
not just do what businessmen want to do.\"  He said he plans 
to pursue construction of a light rail system to provide 
reliable transport for the population and to help alleviate 
the worsening traffic problems of the city.  Fernandez 
estimated that the project would cost between USD 250 and 300 
million and would improve the lives of many.  He acknowledged 
that such a project would not likely be self-sustaining and 
the government would have to subsidize riders, but added that 
the country would benefit in fuel savings and benefits such 
as cleaner air. 
 
14.  (SBU) A second project he wants to support is a housing 
plan that would move around fifteen thousand families away 
from the flood-prone banks of the Ozama river on the eastern 
side of Santo Domingo to a government subsidized housing 
development in a safer area.  The vacated river banks could 
be made environmentally sound and the government would 
undertake an urban renewal project bringing hotels, parks and 
tourists to the new attraction.  The estimated cost of the 
project is  USD 70 million. 
 
15.  (C) While Fernandez was clear in his understanding that 
the Dominican economy faces more urgent issues that must be 
dealt with first, he seems dedicated to the idea of taking on 
the types of projects he finds most appealing. 
 
- - - - - - - - 
COMMENT 
- - - - - - - - 
 
15. (C) Although these were certainly cordial contacts, they 
raise some misgivings for us.  Dominican technicians had been 
closeted with the Fund up until September 3 trying to craft 
solutions to the financial impasse, but during this visit 
none of our Dominican interlocutors talked numbers. A 
reasonable explanation is that the man with the real 
responsibility for making these decisions and securing the 
funds wasn\'t there -- Technical Secretary for the Presidency 
Temistocles Montas.  He, along with chief economist Julio 
Ortega, had been speaking to the Paris Club two days earlier 
and were returning to the Dominican Republic via New York, 
where they were consulting with financial advisors.  Montas 
and Ortega have an appointment to call on Treasury DAS Nancy 
Lee on Thursday, September 16; given their access to 
Fernandez and their expertise, we expect a much clearer 
message. 
KUBISKE 
"
"20657","9/15/2004 20:17","04SANTODOMINGO5156","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005156 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/TPP/BTA (MATTHEWMAN), 
EB/CBA; WHITE HOUSE FOR USTR (R VARGO, S CRONIN -- SEE PARA 
5); NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON;LABOR FOR ILAB; USCINCSO 
ALSO FOR POLAD;TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, PREL, BEXP 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN AMCHAM MEETING TURNS UGLY OVER SUGAR AND 
FTA 
 
1.  (SBU) At the American Chamber of Commerce,s September 
13th board meeting, Charge and Embassy staff were subjected 
to a harsh rant by sugar interests. The meeting was to have 
focused on DR-CAFTA, but it became a forum for a discussion 
of the demands of the sugar sector for protection and the 
recently proposed 25% tax on drinks sweetened with high 
fructose corn syrup (HFCS).  Alfonso Paniagua, sugar lobbyist 
and Vice President of Costasur/Central Romana argued loudly 
against removing the 25% tax from pending tax legislation. 
Although the majority of the participating board members 
spoke moderately and in favor of DR-CAFTA, several others 
joined Paniagua in his argument that the Dominican sugar 
industry cannot compete with an \"extremely subsidized8 
product (HFCS). 
 
2.  (U) The Charge noted that in the World Trde Organization 
the United States is negotiating to liberalize agricultural 
trade.  She thanked the AmCham for their letter to the 
Dominican Congress requesting rejection of the 25 percent tax 
on fructose-flavored drinks.  She said that the U.S. 
Government, through USAID, is investing approximately 3 
million dollars per year in trade capacity building programs 
to help the Dominican Republic become more competitive.  The 
Embassy understands that with the agreement, some sectors 
will benefit more than others.  She indicated that a 15-year 
period had been negotiated for phasing in imports of corn 
syrup, affording the domestic sugar industry a long period of 
time for adjustment.  She emphasized that the Dominican 
Republic cannot afford to miss the opportunity to implement 
the FTA with the United States. 
 
3. (SBU) Haydee de Rainieri, Vice President of the 
tourism-related Punta Cana Group, asked what would happen if 
the DR-CAFTA were to fail.  The Charge responded that failure 
would stiffen opposition in the United States to giving the 
Dominican Republic another chance at a FTA.  There is already 
a long list of countries seeking to negotiate with us.  The 
Dominican Republic must take the opportunity \"now, while the 
window is open.\" 
 
4. (U)  AID\'s Joseph Goodwin described various trade capacity 
building programs currently underway, and cited a study done 
by AID in 2003 estimating that if DR-CAFTA is not approved, 
the Free Trade Zone Industry here will lose at least 40,000 
jobs. 
 
5.  (SBU) AmCham member Luis Heredia Bonetti, a leading 
attorney, asked whether it might be possible to add a 
protocol to the FTA specifying that both sides are interested 
in seeing the elimination of agricultural subsidies through 
the WTO.  The Charge agreed to forward the question to USTR. 
 
6.  (U) Further discussion showed that board members were 
divided on the sugar issue; Frank Rainieri, tourism 
entrepreneur heading the Punta Cana Group, suggested that the 
sugar issue be renegotiated at the WTO, since sugar was the 
only sticking point among AmCham members. There was no 
definitive reaction to his suggestion. 
KUBISKE 
"
"20694","9/16/2004 16:08","04SANTODOMINGO5186","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 005186 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, WHA/OAS, EB/OMA; 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON;LABOR FOR ILAB; USCINCSO ALSO 
FOR POLAD;TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/14/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN POLITICS #2: FERNANDEZ, CRISIS AND 
OPTIMISM 
 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske.  Reason:  1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
 1. (U)  Following is no. 2 in our Politics 2004 series, our 
scenesetter for the visit September 16-17 to the Domincan 
Republic of OAS Amb. John Maisto.  Amb. Maisto will 
participate in public events at the MFA Diplomatic School and 
the \"Foundation for Global Democracy and Development,\" both 
to deal with aspects of the Special Summit of the Americas. 
Amb. Maisto and the Ambassador will call on Dominican 
President Leonel Fernandez on September 16. 
 
Dominican Republic -- Fernandez, Crisis and Optimism 
 
(U) The Dominican Republic, just 70 miles from Puerto Rico 
across the treacherous Mona Passage, is a heavyweight in the 
Caribbean, a strong trading partner, and a helpful ally in 
the Caribbean.  The USG has used its prestige and resources 
to assure that elections here are conducted fairly and with 
close international observation.  We made possible the 
OAS-led election observation for the May presidential 
elections with our $325,000 contribution, and we spent more 
than $1 million in USAID funds to support the highly 
effective civil society observations that put some 6,000 
trained Dominican observers in the field.  Leonel Fernandez 
knows that we were vital in keeping the elections honest and 
thereby in providing his victory. 
 
(U) Leonel Fernandez took office on August 16 with a 
resounding inaugural speech promising a new orientation to 
Dominican government, stern enforcement of laws against 
corruption, resolute measures to confront economic crisis, 
and a new, socially conscious and market-friendly approach to 
government.  He said that the country would pursue peace and 
security through multilateral means, at the UN and the 
Organization of American States. 
 
(SBU) The inaugural celebration brought a giddy rush of 
confidence in the future.  With this optimism, the peso has 
strengthened nearly 20 percent against the dollar, and the 
Central Bank has been able to place its certificates for much 
longer terms at rates suggesting hopes that 40 percent 
inflation will evaporate. The president,s economic manager, 
Technical Secretary Temistocles Montas, sent technicians to 
huddle with the IMF and then traveled last week with chief 
negotiator Julio Ortega to the Paris Club and then to New 
York for financial advice.  On Thursday, the day of your 
arrival in Santo Domingo, they will be calling on Treasury 
Deputy Assistant Secretary Nancy Lee. 
 
A New Broom Sweeps,  Somewhat 
 
(SBU) Fernandez appointed to his cabinet a range of 
reasonably qualified, experienced supporters from his own 
party and from allied parties and factions.  Many, such as 
Montas, Central Bank Governor Hector Valdez Albizu and 
Agriculture Minister Amilcar Romero, are in the same jobs 
that they held in Fernandez I, 1996-2000.  Others are not far 
away -- Vicente Bengoa, Superintendent of Banks while the 
Baninter and other massive scandals were cooking away 
undetected, is now Minister of Finance.  Last time they were 
in office during boom times, when few questions were asked. 
In the new, grim reality, they will be subjected to closer 
scrutiny by everyone. 
 
(SBU) In contrast to these mostly relatively unimaginative 
appointments, Fernandez made excellent choices in 
appointments in law enforcement, especially Francisco 
Dominguez Brito as Attorney General and human rights 
specialist Gen. Perez Sanchez as Police Chief.  New head of 
the Armed Forces Sigfrido Pared Perez is an earnest, honest 
careerist. 
 
(SBU) Fernandez made four appointments to high ranked 
advisory jobs without managerial responsibility that raised 
the hackles of the press -- Mejia,s administration had 
formally charged all four appointees formally with 
embezzlement but never brought their cases to trial. 
Fernandez believes these four were the victims of political 
persecution and had not committed crimes. 
 
Urgent Problems 
 
(U) This new/old administration is struggling with urgent 
problems.  Chief among them: 
- - (SBU) Getting back to the table with the IMF.  The 
Fernandez team worked hard over the summer, with cooperation 
from Mejia,s people, to construct a \"fiscal reform package,\" 
passage of which is likely to be a prerequisite for renewed 
negotiations with the IMF. The Congress has lost a lot of 
time debating an increasingly toothless package.  Worse, 
protectionist sugar interests have grafted into it a 25 pct 
tax on soft drinks and refreshments made with fructose -- a 
measure that runs directly counter to the spirit and letter 
of the bilateral free trade agreement, as well as to WTO 
commitments.  Fernandez has already announced some measures 
to cut government expenditures -- a smaller government 
payroll and reduced subsidies -- but he will have to make 
more drastic cuts to repair the budget, currently running at 
an estimated annual deficit for 2004 equivalent to more than 
7 percent of GDP. 
 
- - (SBU) Convincing the Paris Club.  The Paris Club one-year 
deal struck last March for USD 189 million in rescheduling 
was contingent on government measures for \"comparability of 
treatment\" for private sector creditors.  On September 6 the 
Paris Club atook a relatively flexible approach while urging 
Montas and Ortega to secure a new IMF agreement and to clear 
arrears.  To date the government hasn,t identified its 
approach to \"comparable treatment,\" though it has an offer of 
a syndicated USD 100 million loan through Citibank that might 
be construed to fulfill the requirement. 
 
- - (SBU) Getting to restructuring.  There are Dominican 
arrears all over the world, including to bilateral creditors, 
IFIs, and the private sector.  Fernandez,s team says 
earnestly that they will clear these, as required by the IMF 
and the Paris Club, and they,ve found funds with which to 
avoid catastrophic defaults on sovereign bonds and sovereign 
guarantees, although only by a matter of hours.  For the 
rest, they have not identified to us the sources of funding. 
There is talk about a relatively mysterious \"USD 500 million\" 
to be volunteered by a combination of Spanish tourism 
investors, commercial banks, and friendly countries such as 
Brazil and Venezuela.  No one has seen the color of the money. 
 
- - (C) Solving the crisis of energy supply and pricing.  The 
electricity sector is almost completely without capital -- 
Fernandez has borrowed USD 50 million from domestic banks, 
enough to pay a small percentage of overdue government debts 
so generators can purchase fuel over the next three months. 
He says he has asked Venezuela,s Hugo Chavez to sell him 
petroleum at a 25 percent discount over six months, with 
15-year terms for financing.  At best, this might be a 
six-month respite; at worst, it could provide a point of 
leverage for Chavez,s regional political agenda (note, 
however, that Fernandez has shown absolutely no sympathy for 
Chavez,s views).  Similarly, Fernandez,s advisors are 
seeking to target the huge subsidy on cooking gas so that 
only households collect it, but they need at least four 
months to build the data base to target deliveries and 
implement a new system.  The 16,000 or so transport drivers 
using that same gas in their vehicles will lose the subsidy 
and could organize fierce opposition to the scheme. benefits. 
 
- - (SBU) Free trade -- on board or just talk?  In his 
relatively general discussions of globalization, Fernandez 
has been happy to endorse investment in education, science, 
and other long-term measures to improve competitiveness.  He 
used these themes on the second day of his administration, 
when at a signing of a grant made by U.S. Agriculture 
Secretary Ann Veneman the press asked him about the free 
 
SIPDIS 
trade agreement with the U.S. and the Central Americans 
(DR-CAFTA).  In the face of a determined month-long slander 
campaign against DR-CAFTA mounted by the sugar lobby, he has 
made no public comment.  In response to the congressional 
maneuver of the 25 percent tax on fructose drinks, he has 
left management of the issue to his cabinet.  First the 
Finance Minister told Congress to go ahead, because the 
administration would table a repeal proposal.  When the 
Ambassador made clear the sweeping political consequences in 
the U.S. of voting such a tax, Technical Secretary Montas 
formally asked the Senate to drop the measure.  Senators 
publicly labeled the Montas letter \"unacceptable,\" asserting 
that the President himself has the responsibility of 
communicating with the legislature. 
 
- - (C) Corruption and Banking Fraud.  Fernandez has very 
good people in law enforcement, and first in-depth 
discussions suggest that the Central Bank Governor and legal 
staff will be steely in their pursuit of the cases against 
\"Ramoncito\" Baez and others at Baninter and other banks, 
whose embezzlement of breath-taking sums (equivalent to 20 
pct of 2003 GDP) put the economy into its current severe 
disequilibrium.  The Attorney General has barred \"Ramoncito\" 
from leaving the country.  Assistant Secretary Noriega and 
Amb. Hertell have urged the need for effective prosecution 
and exemplary punishment.  U.S. authorities have been working 
with the Central Bank to help this happen.  We need for 
Fernandez to hear it yet again.  It is widely believed that 
he accepted favors and emoluments from Baez, as retainer 
payments for \"legal advice.\"  Fernandez has not made any 
comments about the case, and his people regularly tell us 
that since the cases are in the judicial system, the 
administration can say nothing. 
 
Your Presence and Your Message 
 
(U) Fernandez will welcome your public message of coordinated 
efforts across the hemisphere in favor of social development 
and institution building.  He likes the big picture and he 
wants to be a regional leader. 
 
(C)  In our opinion, it is the tough private message you can 
bring him that will do the relationship the most good.  He 
needs to hear from an experienced practitioner that financial 
repair cannot wait on dreamy scheming; he needs to hear that 
adjustment means imposing austerity quickly and decisively so 
that the country will have a chance to regain equilibrium in 
time for it to do offer him the prospects for re-election in 
2006.  He must hear again from us that corruption undermines 
democratic institutions. And perhaps most urgently -- 
although the hour may now be too late -- he needs to hear 
that it is time to declare a firm position on DR-CAFTA, or 
risk losing support in the United States -- not only for his 
trading policy, but very possibly for other, more 
far-reaching interests of the Dominican Republic. 
 
In the last analysis, we want Ferandez on our side and 
engaged with us in pursuit of prosperity, rather than 
wandering off into a fuzzy pan-Latino vision that leaves his 
people short of opportunity and still foundering in debt and 
corruption. 
 
2. (U)  Drafted by Michael Meigs. 
 
3. (U)  This report and others in the series are available at 
our SIPNET classified site 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo< /a>  along with 
extensive other material. 
KUBISKE 
"
"20757","9/19/2004 15:01","04SANTODOMINGO5227","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE194274","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005227 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC, KNNP, TRGY, PTER, MNUC, DR 
SUBJECT: GTRI PARTNERS\' CONFERENCE IN VIENNA: DOMINICAN 
REPUBLIC RESPONSE 
 
REF: STATE 194274 
 
Embassy on September 10 provided reftel talking points and 
revised findings of the Global Threat Reduction Initiative 
International Partners\' Conference in Vienna, September 
18-19, to the Foreign Secretariat\'s international 
organization division and the Technical Secretariat of the 
Presidency.  Dr. Rafael Cuello, who heads DR\'s National 
Commission on Nuclear Issues (CNAN), subsequently thanked us 
for the information which had been forwarded to him, but said 
the Dominican Republic would not send a representative 
because of the country\'s current financial problems.  He said 
that he had never missed an IAEA meeting, but that the GODR 
lacked funds to send him and was restricting official travel. 
 He asked if outside financing were possible; we replied 
that, even if it were available, the short lead time would 
preclude it. 
HERTELL 
"
"20789","9/20/2004 18:09","04SANTODOMINGO5242","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04SANTODOMINGO5080","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 005242 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/OMA 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
WHITEHOUSE FOR USTR-VARGO 
USDA FOR ITP - SHEIKH AND GRUNENFELDER 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
STATE FOR USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/17/2009 
TAGS: ETRD, EFIN, PREL, PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN PRES. FERNANDEZ OFFERS TO RESOLVE CORN 
SYRUP TAX ISSUE 
 
REF: A. SANTO DOMINGO 5080 
 
     B. SANTO DOMINGO 5024 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Hans H. Hertell for Reason 1.4 (a) and (d). 
 
 1. (C) Summary: Visiting USOAS PermRep Ambassador John 
Maisto and Ambassador Hertell took advantage of a meeting 
planned on Summit of the Americas to tell President Fernandez 
and Foreign Secretary Carlos Morales Troncoso September 16 
that a proposed 25 percent tax on products containing high 
fructose corn syrup (HFCS), if approved by the Domnican 
Congress as planned September 21, would be a deal-breaker for 
U.S. ratification of DR-CAFTA.  Fernandez got the message and 
proposed that he (and the USG) try to convince leaders of the 
opposition PRD -- which controls the Dominican Congress -- to 
delete the tax from the fiscal reform bill, now awaiting 
passage as part of a series of measures needed to re-launch 
an IMF program.  Both sides agreed there were other, better 
ways to deal with the Dominican sugar industry\'s concerns, 
e.g., joining us as allies in the WTO to negotiate a global 
opening in agriculture as part of the multilateral 
negotiations launched at Doha.  On the fiscal reform overall, 
Maisto noted that the key to resuming an IMF program was to 
develop a program that would meet the government\'s financial 
needs.  Such a program would offer a basis for dialogue with 
the IMF and other international financial institutions. 
Fernandez said he was \"trying to do things correctly\" with 
the IMF, but had to consider the dire social consequences of 
a drastic fiscal adjustment, which could mean political 
\"suicide\" for his newly installed administration.  Also on 
September 16, Ambassador Hertell met with leaders of 
free-zone businesses and urged them to mount a last-minute 
lobbying effort.  End summary. 
 
------------------ 
Status of HFCS tax 
------------------ 
 
2. (C) Visiting USOAS PermRep Ambassador John Maisto and 
Ambassador Hertell, accompanied by Embassy staff, met 
September 16 with President Fernandez (PLD) and Foreign 
Secretary Carlos Morales Troncoso to discuss Summit of the 
 
SIPDIS 
Americas.  They took advantage of the opportunity to raise 
the pending fiscal reform, passage of which is needed for 
renewal of the Dominican Republic\'s IMF program.  The 
conversation focused on a 25 percent tax on beverages 
containing high fructose corn syrup (HFCS) that had been 
added to the bill at the last minute before approval in the 
Chamber of Deputies and which President Fernandez, opposition 
PRD chief Vicente Sanchez Baret, and Senate president Andres 
Bautista (PRD) had all promised Ambassador Hertell September 
9 would be removed before full passage of the fiscal reform 
bill (see reftel).  The Senate unexpectedly approved the 
first reading of the fiscal reform bill September 14 with the 
25 percent tax still in it.  A second (final) reading and 
vote is scheduled for September 21. 
 
------------------------- 
Deal-Breaker for DR-CAFTA 
------------------------- 
 
3. (C) Ambassadors Maisto and Hertell told Fernandez that, 
despite much good will in Washington toward his newly 
installed administration, we could not renegotiate any 
provision of the free trade agreement (DR-CAFTA), period. 
The negotiations are over, they emphasized.  The DR-CAFTA, as 
signed in August, was an international commitment, subject 
only to ratification.  The proposed tax on products 
containing HFCS ran counter to DR-CAFTA and would be a 
deal-breaker in the ratification process.  U.S. legislators 
who are friends of the Dominican Republic have indicated that 
the tax would kill DR-CAFTA\'s chances for ratification. 
 
4. (C) On the fiscal reform as a whole, Maisto urged 
Fernandez to exert leadership and take bold strokes; band-aid 
solutions would not work.  The GODR needed to develop a 
financial program that adds up and makes sense.  If this 
happens, there would be a basis for a solution to be 
discussed with the IMF and other international financial 
institutions. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Good Administration, Bad Congress 
--------------------------------- 
 
5. (C) President Fernandez replied that he was carrying out 
the fiscal reform as mandated by the IMF: \"I\'m willing to 
cooperate and am trying to do things correctly.\"  His 
proposed fiscal adjustment, 2.5 percent of GDP through 
revenue measures plus a 10 percent cut in public spending, 
was the limit of what was politically feasible or 
economically possible.  If he deepened the adjustment to 4 
percent of GDP as recommended by the IMF, \"people would go 
into the streets\" and his new government would commit 
\"suicide.\"  The country is very fragile, he asserted.  He is 
still consolidating his administration.  Critics, here and 
abroad, were \"misunderstanding\" his good faith efforts.  He 
had anticipated that relations with the IMF would be \"more 
fluid,\" but now his government was \"paralyzed\" (by lack of 
access to further IFI disbursements).  The DR\'s financial 
predicament was due to the previous administration\'s \"failure 
of leadership and mismanagement.\"  His government, by 
contrast, was trying hard to move on all fronts -- with the 
IMF, with the Paris Club, and with Venezuelan President 
Chavez over preferential terms for buying oil.  Fernandez 
asked that the IFIs \"give me the green light.\" 
 
6. (C) The opposition PRD -- not the Fernandez administration 
-- inserted the HFCS tax into the legislation, the President 
noted.  The PRD, which controls Congress, had created the 
problem.  Ambassador Hertell had asked him to remove the tax, 
and Fernandez noted that critics were saying such a move 
would be tantamount to promoting a special interest over the 
national interest.  Fernandez mentioned \"options\" of (1) 
passing the urgently needed fiscal reform as is and later 
revoking the HFCS tax through separate legislation, or (2) 
reducing the tax from 25 percent to 15 or 10.  Ambassador 
Hertell emphasized that both these ideas were non-starters. 
Fernandez said he had acceded to our wishes and sent a letter 
to the Senate requesting deletion of the tax.  For this he 
had been harshly criticized in the press.  The tax was a real 
problem, but should be viewed as a conflict between private 
interests, not between governments. 
 
7. (C) Ambassador Hertell said we appreciated Fernandez\'s 
effort with the letter.  However, Senate contacts had told us 
that the letter -- signed by Technical Secretary of the 
Presidency Temistocles Montas -- had been insufficient and 
that it was necessary for Fernandez to send a clear statement 
of policy over his own signature.  Ambassador Maisto urged 
Fernandez to agree to a meeting with Treasury Secretary Snow 
in Washington during the President\'s upcoming trip to the 
United States (September 19-26).  President Fernandez said he 
first wanted to hear back from the GODR officials who were 
visiting Treasury September 16.  Maisto emphasized that the 
only way to resolve the protectionism issue, which underlay 
the proposal to tax beverages using HFCS, was for the United 
States and the Dominican Republic to work together in Geneva 
to significantly reduce agricultural subsidies worldwide. 
That, he said, would be a win-win for all. 
 
----------------- 
Leonel\'s Proposal 
----------------- 
 
8. (C) Near the end of the long discussion, President 
Fernandez acknowledged the urgent need to find a solution to 
the HFCS tax issue.  This provision had to be removed from 
the fiscal package.  Fernandez would talk with three PRD 
leaders -- former President Mejia, party president Vicente 
Sanchez Baret, and Senate president Andres Bautista -- and 
convince them to modify the bill in the Senate on September 
21 and then secure prompt approval of the bill by the Chamber 
of Deputies without the 25 percent tax.  Mejia, despite his 
electoral defeat, was still influential, and he might be 
willing to help to save the DR-CAFTA.  Fernandez had succeed 
in getting Mejia to weigh in on other occasions.  Fernandez 
requested that Ambassador Hertell lend a hand in trying to 
persuade these leaders.  The Ambassador plans follow-up. 
Fernandez also mentioned that the GODR could then bring a 
case against the USG in the WTO for use of \"unfair 
agricultural subsidies.\"  Ambassadors Maisto and Hertell 
urged President Fernandez to take the high-road, win-win 
approach of joining forces in the WTO, rather than this 
low-road approach of a WTO dispute that had been suggested by 
some private sector Dominicans. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
9. (C) This is the second time that Fernandez has agreed to 
action to get the Senate to remove the 25 percent tax from 
the fiscal reform bill before the bill\'s passage.  Bautista\'s 
about-face, which we understand was due to his offense at 
being pressured by PRD party chief Sanchez Baret, suggests 
that institutional, partisan, or interpersonal sensitivities 
could still override clear calculation of national interests. 
 Another potential obstacle could be the lack of a letter to 
the Senate signed by Fernandez himself.  Despite the fact 
that Fernandez\'s Technical Secretary Temistocles Montas had 
written a letter to the Senate requesting removal of the 25 
percent tax, the opposition has been asking for one from 
Fernandez to, in their own words, \"dispel doubts\" about his 
true views on this issue.  Despite Embassy\'s many 
conversations with government, party, congressional, and 
private sector representatives, it is still too early to know 
how the vote will go; we hope that our many Dominican 
interlocutors have heard our insistent and clear message that 
the 25 percent tax is unacceptable. 
10. (C) The leaders of manufacturing and free zone 
enterprises that stand to benefit from the DR-CAFTA are 
finally awakened to the threat of the well-organized campaign 
that agricultural interests have conducted for the past 
several months to sink the accord.  Whether the businesses\' 
last-minute lobbying will be enough to turn the tide in 
Congress remains to be seen. 
HERTELL 
"
"20873","9/22/2004 22:52","04SANTODOMINGO5302","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04SANTODOMINGO5242","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 005302 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA - SHAPIRO, URS, MCISAAC; EB FOR DONNELLY, 
MANOGUE, VOLK, YOUTH, HONAN, AARON, FRISBIE; E FOR CADE; 
TREASURY FOR OASIA - LEE, TOLOUI, AND LAMONICA; WHITE HOUSE 
FOR USTR - MALITO, VARGO; USTR FOR ALLGEIER; NSC FOR TOM 
SHANNON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/22/2014 
TAGS: ETRD, PREL, BEXP, PGOV, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: FORMER DOMINICAN PRESIDENT OPTIMISTIC THAT SENATE 
WILL PASS FISCAL REFORM WITHOUT HFCS-RELATED TAX 
 
REF: A. (C) SANTO DOMINGO 05242 
 
     B. (U) SANTO DOMINGO 05156 
     C. (C) SANTO DOMINGO 05080 
     D. (C) SANTO DOMINGO 05024 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR HANS H. HERTELL FOR REASON: 1.4 (A) AND (D). 
 
1.  (C)  SUMMARY AND COMMENT.  Former Dominican President 
Hipolito Mejia told Ambassador Hertell September 22 that he 
expects that the effort will succeed to remove from the 
fiscal reform bill now in the Senate the proposed 25 percent 
tax on beverages that use high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS). 
It may take a few more days.  Mejia has been lending, and 
will continue to lend, his weight and political clout from 
behind the scenes to resolve this issue.  Mejia,s clear 
support, plus that of President Fernandez, Monsignor Agripino 
Nunez Collado and other heavyweights, including major 
business organizations, brings new confidence that the vote 
will come out the right way.   End Summary and Comment. 
 
2.  (C)  At short notice, former President Mejia agreed to 
meet with Ambassador Hertell September 22 to discuss the 
problematic 25 percent tax on drinks made with HFCS included 
in the fiscal reform legislation currently up for a second 
vote in the Senate.  As reported in (Ref C), a first reading 
of the draft legislation, which includes a 25 percent tax on 
beverages made with HFCS, was approved last week in a rush 
vote by the opposition PRD-controlled Senate.  This meeting 
followed a heated week of diplomacy and advocacy to remove 
the HFCS-related tax from the fiscal reform legislation 
needed for the Dominican Republic to resume its IMF program, 
and then pass the fiscal reform package (See Reftels.) 
 
Background:  Ambassador,s and Fernandez, September 20 
Meetings with Senators 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
3.  (C)  On September 20, the Ambassador met with Senate 
President Andres Bautista, PRD whip and spokesman Senator 
Anibal Garcia, and eight other senators (including several 
from sugar provinces) to review the US position on the 
question removing the HFCS-related tax from the fiscal reform 
bill.  The Ambassador unequivocally said that the Senate 
should not allow the HFCS-related tax to be included in a tax 
reform law, and cautioned that without senators\' strong 
leadership, our two countries would not realize the benefits 
of DR-CAFTA.  He conveyed Washington views that an attempt to 
remove the HFCS-related tax after first passing the fiscal 
reform bill would be unworkable.  Though the senators present 
complained that President Fernandez,s own position on the 
issue was not entirely clear, they agreed to work to remove 
the tax, pass the modified bill in the Senate, and then send 
it back to the Chamber of Deputies for, hopefully, a quick 
vote along the same lines. 
 
4.  (C)  In the afternoon of the same day, President 
Fernandez asked the Ambassador to join his own meeting with 
the Senate leadership (Bautista and Garcia).   The Ambassador 
hand-delivered USTR Zoellick,s letter to Fernandez and 
reviewed its contents.  President Fernandez told the senators 
that without DR-CAFTA, the Dominican Republic would be left 
out of the region,s largest free trade group, while Mexico 
and the Central Americans would have advantaged access to the 
US market.  Fernandez noted that the fiscal reform package 
was a very high priority for the GODR, but it could not be 
achieved at the expense of DR-CAFTA.  He reiterated that a 
week earlier, he himself had instructed his Technical 
Secretary, Temistocles Montas, to send the Senate a letter 
 
SIPDIS 
asking it to remove the HFCS-related tax (which Montas had 
done).  Fernandez, speaking directly to the senators, 
suggested that once the fiscal reform, minus the HFCS-related 
tax, was passed, he could support private sector complaints 
with a GODR-launched complaint against the United States at 
the WTO.   Bautista agreed that this might be a good way to 
proceed.  The Ambassador said the US position was that we 
should be partners in the WTO (in ongoing multilateral 
negotiations).  Fernandez and the senators agreed to try to 
get the support of the Senate leaders of all three major 
political parties, in order to set an example for the Chamber 
of Deputies, where the bill would be very controversial once 
again.  They agreed to try to move the legislation as quickly 
as possible. 
Politicking 
------------- 
5.  (C)  The senators spent the following day, September 21, 
trying to broker this arrangement.  In the meantime, the 
Ambassador, who then traveled to Santiago, received public 
support from all the major business organizations of this 
trade-oriented city for DR-CAFTA (and for removing the 
HFCS-related tax from the fiscal reform bill).  These 
organizations also took out full-page ads in the country,s 
leading dailies. 
 
6.  (C)  As of the morning of September 22, there were 14 
senators ready to vote to remove the tax and pass a modified 
fiscal reform bill, but 17 senators who wanted to pass the 
bill as is.  (One senator was out of the country.)  Note: 
These numbers have changed slightly throughout the day and 
could change again.  The PRD opposition reportedly saw an 
opportunity to win concessions from the PLD on a host of 
other issues, which further complicated the work.  Faced with 
this situation, the Ambassador called former President Mejia, 
who arrived at the Ambassador,s residence a scant 10 minutes 
later. 
 
The Conversation with Former President Mejia 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
7.  (C)  The Ambassador reiterated that the US position 
remained firm, that the Dominican Republic would lose its 
participation in DR-CAFTA if the fiscal reform bill passed 
with the HFCS-related tax in it.  Former president Mejia 
noted that the United States had been perfectly clear; \"you 
have been clearer than a diplomat,\" he joked.  Mejia was 
confident that the vote would come out right.  \"I didn,t 
want to get out in front, but I,ve got control in the Senate 
and can get enough votes.\"  It would probably take a few 
days, he said.  He calls Foreign Minister Morales Troncoso,s 
comments on behalf of sugar \"unfortunate\" and a reflection of 
the foreign minister,s own personal opinion.  He offered to 
get together with the Ambassador again on Monday, September 
27. 
 
Other Conversations 
-------------------------- 
8.  (C)  The Ambassador and Emboffs have had a series of 
other conversations during the past several days, including 
with Monsignor Agripino Nunez Collado, Senator Alejandro 
Santos (PRD and favorable to the US position), former chief 
Dominican negotiator and trade secretary Sonia Guzman, 
Guzman,s assistant Hugo Rivera, and others.   All of these 
contacts have been (and continue to be) active, either out in 
front or behind the scenes, and they come to the task 
representing different constituencies. 
 
Comment 
------------ 
9.  (C)  At this stage, given the participation of several 
real heavyweights in Dominican politics and President 
Fernandez,s clear language with the Senate leadership, we 
are now guardedly optimistic of winning this titanic 
struggle, though not as quickly as we had hoped.  We have 
confidence in Mejia,s ability to deliver the additional 
Senate votes needed.  This is not to say that the battle will 
be over in the Senate; the likelihood is for a renewed battle 
as well in the Chamber of Deputies (where, we have been told, 
we can count on the support of Chamber of Deputies president 
Alfredo Pacheco, of the PRD). 
 
10.  (C)  This confrontation between Fernandez and the 
Congress after just one month in office has provided the 
first major test of the administration.  In the executive 
branch, we have seen a lack of discipline about the 
government,s policy, e.g., in the public statement made by 
Foreign Minister Morales Troncoso against his 
own president,s position.  We suspect the Foreign Minister 
was motivated by his own personal loyalties from a long 
association with the largest sugar interest in the country. 
In the legislative branch, Fernandez has proved to be able to 
sway the vote of his own PLD\'s sole senator, but seemingly 
hesitant in the face of PRD and PRSC opposition.  The best 
outcome would be rapid passage of the fiscal reform -- minus 
the HFCS-related tax -- and a resulting new respect for 
Fernandez, presidency.  Time and continued efforts by the 
Embassy, Washington, and the GODR will tell.  The outcome 
could affect Fernandez,s ability  to enact his proposals 
into law between now and the 2006 legislative elections, when 
his ruling PLD will have its first chance to tilt the balance 
of forces in Congress. 
 
11.  (C) Events like this are opportunities to strengthen 
democracy.  In our view, former President Mejia, Senate 
President Bautista, and political mediator Monsignor  Nunez 
have stepped up to the leadership plate.  They are heavy 
hitters, and there are several innings left in the game. 
 
 11. 
KUBISKE 
"
"21049","9/28/2004 13:12","04SANTODOMINGO5372","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE197861","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005372 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR SONJA MADERA DHHS/NIH/FIC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, KSCA, OSCI, TBIO 
SUBJECT: REQUEST FOR ASSESSMENT OF FOREIGN POLICY 
IMPLICATIONS OF A PROPOSED RESEARCH PROJECT NO 1 R21 
AT001889 - 01A1 INVOLVING A FOREIGN INSTITUTION 
 
REF: SECSTATE 197861 
 
Embassy Santo Domingo has no foreign policy objection to 
proposed research, pending Dominican Government authority 
approves subject research (Hep C and Hep B virus) on human 
subjects. 
HERTELL 
"
"21095","9/29/2004 14:21","04SANTODOMINGO5394","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SECSTATE201391","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005394 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EB/ESC/TFS, S/CT, INL/C, IO/PHO, TREASURY, 
TREASURY OFAC, WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN, ETTC, KVPR, PREL, PTER, KTFN 
SUBJECT: TERRORISM FINANCE COORDINATION OFFICER (TFCO) AT 
POST - SANTO DOMINGO 
 
REF: SECSTATE 201391 
 
1. (U)As requested, following is the TFCO related information. 
 
2. (SBU)(a) Contact information for: 
    TFCO: Lisa J. Kubiske, DCM, (809)731-4308, 
kubiskeLJ@state.gov and 
   DTFCO: Stephen S. Wheeler, Chief Econ Officer, 
(809)731-4293, wheelerSS@state.gov. 
 
(b) Who chairs terrorist finance meetings? Does post combine 
terrorist finance agenda items into law Enforcement meetings? 
 Meetings of the Visas Viper Committee? 
 
The DCM chairs the terrorist finance meetings. The Embassy 
combines terrorist finance and terrorism issues in a joint 
Law enforcement/Visas viper monthly meeting. 
 
(c) What does post attempt to accomplish in its TF working 
group meetings?  Are they successful?  How are country 
clearance requests for training, assessments, and other 
terrorist financing related visits reviewed and answered by 
the TFCO process? 
 
In Law Enforcement/Visas Viper meetings terrorism issues in 
general are raised and shared with all participating 
agencies, including, DHS, FBI, DEA, DAO, MAAG, State (Econ, 
pol, cons, nas).  Coordinated approaches are discussed as to 
how to use the information and which agencies have action. 
Terrorist Finance issues have been relatively straight 
forward.  The Econ section has the action to coordinate with 
the GODR Central Bank and Superintency of Banks to pass 
releasable information and ask for coordination and 
assistance in disseminating relevant information.  Country 
clearance requests for training and assisance and other 
terrorist financing related visits are generally reviewed an 
answered jointly by the Pol/Econ section and the NAS section. 
 
(d) Suggestions on how to improve coordination among TFCOs 
and between TFCOs and appropriate State and Treasury offices. 
 
Updated contact information on every Embassy\'s officers as 
well as key officials at State and Treasury via Siprinet web 
page would be useful. 
 
(e) Suggestions on how to more effectively engage in public 
diplomacy, and community education and outreach on terrorist 
financing related issues. 
 
Periodic suggestions for op-ed pieces that could be submitted 
to local news outlets under the Embassy or Ambassador by-line. 
 
(f) Indication if TFCO and deputy have received FSI or other 
training in combating terrorist financing 
 
No. 
 
(g) What post needs from Washington agencies to make its TF 
work more effective. 
 
Nothing further required at this time. 
HERTELL 
"
"21151","9/30/2004 15:32","04SANTODOMINGO5425","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 005425 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/OMA; 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON;LABOR FOR ILAB; USCINCSO ALSO 
FOR POLAD;TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN POLITICS #3: FREE TRADE, PAID JOURNALISM 
AND BAD PRESS FOR THE UNITED STATES 
 
 
1.  Following is number 3 in our series on Dominican politics 
in 2004: 
 
Free Trade, Paid Journalism and Bad Press for the United 
States 
 
A small, powerful coterie of infuriated sugar barons 
continues to use influence and money in an effort to convince 
the Dominican public of the bad faith of Dominican 
negotiators, the U.S. government, and the Ambassador.  The 
results have been ugly.  In our previous message we outlined 
their strategy, with a particular mention of the series of 
costly full-page advertisements in all significant national 
newspapers.  Now that the sugar industry has muscled a 
protectionist tax on fructose-sweetened beverages into a tax 
bill celebrated with ads proclaiming \"A CONFIRMATION OF 
PATRIOTISM,\" their proponents are orchestrating journalistic 
attacks on the Ambassador.  The effect -- and probably the 
aim -- is to raise nationalistic support for their 
\"patriotic\" stance against \"pressures of the U.S. Embassy.\" 
 
Dominican journalists like drama and conflict, and they 
happily inflate passing comments into supposedly rigid 
pugilistic positions.  Alongside their stories of U.S. 
diplomatic \"pressure\" on Congress they have run lengthy 
accounts of comments by the sugar interests and by 
congressional representatives who have no understanding of 
the mechanisms or the stakes of this discussion.  Some 
congressmen have commented that a \"mere $24 million\" in 
potential sales to soft drink bottlers could not possibly 
threaten a bilateral trade relationship of $8 billion.  Some 
cite the case of Mexico,s tax on fructose beverages as proof 
(ignoring or unaware of the fact that Mexico had been in 
NAFTA for ten years before trying that gambit). Others hold 
that the trade agreement can certainly be renegotiated, since 
it hasn,t been ratified by either side.   These commentators 
say that no more than a \"technical rectification\" is 
required, similar to that asked and granted for 8 sensitive 
domestic products when the Dominican Republic belatedly 
realized the implications of having joined the WTO. 
 
The Ambassador has taken a non-confrontational but clear 
approach to the press throughout our efforts to convince the 
administration and the congressional leadership that the 
protectionist tax really, truly would sink the Dominican 
portion of the free trade agreement.   At times he has 
avoided public comment on sensitive talks. For example, on 
Monday of this week, September 27, after a two-hour session 
with Leonel Fernandez, congressional leaders, Danilo Medina, 
and Msgr. Agripino Nunez, the Ambassador left through the 
back door so as to avoid the eager press mob outside. 
 
But it,s not just the search for nave drama that has 
motivated reporters.  We are convinced that sugar interests 
are buying slanted coverage; and coinciding with the 
hand-back of the daily Listin Diario to the Baninter-tainted 
Baez family, that paper has taken a sharp anti-U.S. turn 
generally.  On September 24 Listin ran a piece titled 
\"Washington doesn,t allow Leonel even 10% of what it 
tolerated with Hipolito\" (not available in the on-line 
edition) and on September 28 its boldface headline was \"Hans 
Hertell warns the Dominican Republic it,s exposing itself to 
drastic measures.\" That day its lead editorial \"Out of 
Bounds\" began, \"Dominicans are hopingfor a relation of mutual 
respect with the United States, not a model based in the 
systematic, bare-faced and unilateral pressure and 
interference, across the board and everywhere, that appears 
to have prevailed recently\"  (see our SIPRNET site) When the 
Embassy pointed out that the Ambassador had never used the 
phrase \"drastic measures,\" on September 29 the paper 
retracted the headline (although below the fold) and printed 
a correct transcription of his remarks, surrounded by 
self-justifications by Senate President Bautista and 
sugar-friendly congressmen. 
 
On September 29 the Ambassador hosted editors of all major 
newspapers for lunch, as well as the leading television 
broadcast anchor team, continuing his series of press 
outreach encounters. In a lengthy, cordial discussion he 
stressed to them the advantages of the trade agreement and 
the very real possibility that the country would be excluded 
from the regional arrangement.  The Ambassador stressed that 
the United States interest lies principally in assuring a 
secure, prosperous Dominican Republic as a partner in the 
Caribbean.  He outlined his approaches to the executive and 
legislative branches, emphatically stressing that the United 
States has at no point exerted pressure or threatened 
sanctions.  Embassy provided WTO information about the Mexico 
tax case, including copies of Article III of the GATT, which 
enjoins members from using internal taxes and laws to 
restrain trade. 
 
At the lunch TV commentator Miguel Guerrero explained to 
colleagues the price advantages that the Dominican sugar and 
rice industry are currently reaping from their monopoly 
market.  He suggested that one approach to the fructose 
problem might be to rescind the tax while setting up 
licensing mechanisms for imports, to assure that the sugar 
interests might themselves handle corn syrup imports, at 
least for a time.  Guerrero used the term \"solomonic 
decision,\" a term rapidly becoming a code for figuring out 
some way to placate the sugar interests while not sinking the 
trade agreement. 
 
The same evening at the opening of the Cibao regional fair in 
Santiago the Ambassador was scheduled once again lay out our 
consistent message on the benefits of free trade.  We expect 
this to be a friendly crowd.  The free zone companies that 
stand most to benefit will be in attendance; they have very 
belatedly begun to mobilize a public relations campaign, 
including their own full-page ads. 
 
The day is late but we hope that the stark danger of losing 
the trade agreement and the efforts of the free zone 
entrepreneurs will work against the sugar rush that has 
seized the press and through them much of the general public. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Michael Meigs 
 
3.  This cable and others in our reporting series can be 
viewed on on SIPRNET site 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo< /a> along with 
extensive other material. 
 
HERTELL 
"
"21152","9/30/2004 15:32","04SANTODOMINGO5426","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN","04SANTODOMINGO2821","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 005426 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), DEPT PASS TO SEC, FEDERAL 
RESERVE; 
TREASURY FOR LAMONICA; 
DOJ FOR OIA (MAZUREK AND ORJALES) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/30/2010 
TAGS: EFIN, PGOV, PREL, KJUS, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN BANKING SERIES # 7 - NEW LEGAL TEAMS AIM 
AT ALVAREZ RENTA AND PROMISE VIGOROUS PROSECUTIONS 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 2821 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske, reasons 1.4 (b) & (d). 
 
 1. (U)  This is cable number 7 in a periodic series on the 
banking system and bank frauds in the Dominican Republic. 
SEE ACTION REQUESTS FOR SEC AND DOJ/OIA BELOW. 
 
 
NEW LEGAL TEAMS AIM AT ALVAREZ RENTA AND PROMISE VIGOROUS 
PROSECUTIONS 
 
 
2.  (U)  Legal actions and investigations continue against 
executives of Dominican banks Baninter, Bancredito and Banco 
Mercantil, the 2003 failures and frauds of which resulted in 
losses of approximately 20 % of Dominican GDP, virtually all 
of it assumed by the government. Previous reports tell the 
political and forensic story through the presidential 
election of May 2004, won by former President Leonel 
Fernandez against incumbent Hipolito Mejia.  The Fernandez 
administration has now been in office for six weeks, and has 
begun to deal with the many economic, financial and judicial 
leftovers of the banking frauds. 
 
3.  (SBU)  Newly appointed head counsel for the Central Bank 
Fidel Pichardo has told us that the Fernandez administration 
plans to continue to pursue legal action against the 
principals in the major bank fraud cases in the Dominican 
Republic.  He echoed the refrain we have heard many times 
before from previous administration officials:  \"We will do 
the best we can, but the judicial system here (Dominican 
Republic) is weak.  We need the USG to move forward on the 
cases in the United States.\" 
 
4.  (C)  Pichardo met with us on two different occasions in 
early September to discuss the Baninter and Bancredito cases 
(Banco Mercantil was raised tangentially, but was not the 
focus of the discussion).  On September 14 he flew to Miami 
to meet with the Central Bank\'s U.S. legal counsel, Tew 
Cardenas, and the U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of 
Florida.  Pichardo wanted to impress upon us that the 
Fernandez administration will not stand for corruption - they 
will continue to prosecute the cases and attempt to punish 
those who are culpable.  Nevertheless, he expressed surprise 
that the United States has not moved forward (his perception) 
on criminal cases against the principal actors.  He commented 
that the United States, \"has many more resources and says it 
wants to pursue justice.\"  He told us that he wants to see 
the cases move forward in the United States because, despite 
a promise of an all out effort in the Dominican courts, he 
does not expect the Dominican judicial system to be able to 
handle the cases properly. 
 
5.  (C)  Pichardo spent quite a bit of time summarizing the 
Baninter case, perhaps more for his own benefit than anyone 
else\'s.  He stated that before being named as head legal 
counsel for the Central Bank he had followed the case in the 
press and via word of mouth among the members of the local 
bar.  After having the opportunity to review the summary of 
the case and the evidence against the actors, he said he was 
amazed at the size and scope of the fraud.  He told us that 
he knows the public perception exists that the Fernandez 
administration may be \"soft\" on the Baninter case due to 
former ties between President Fernandez and \"Ramoncito\" Baez. 
 He assured us that the public perception is wrong and that 
the Fernandez administration stands for justice and the fight 
against corruption. 
 
6.  (C)  Even so, Pichardo attempted to refocus the spotlight 
on Luis Alvarez Renta and send Ramoncito Baez to the fringes 
of the stage.  He told us that in his opinion Alvarez Renta 
was the true mastermind of both the Baninter and Bancredito 
cases and should be the focal point of the U.S. criminal 
case.  He emphasized, more than once, that Alvarez Renta has 
assets in the United States that could be seized.  He asked 
why seizure has not yet taken place. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Zero interest loan, no collateral necessary 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
7.  (C)  Pichardo outlined Alvarez Renta\'s involvement in one 
area of the Bancredito case.  He told us that the Central 
Bank has irrefutable evidence that Bancredito, then 
controlled by the Pellerano family, made a US $15 million 
zero interest loan to Alvarez Renta.  The loan was made with 
the instruction to use the funds to purchase Tricom stock 
(Tricom\'s majority shareholder was also the Pellerano 
family).  On the loan documents, the Tricom stock, not yet 
purchased, was listed as collateral.  Pichardo said the move 
was made to drive up the value of the Tricom stock on the 
NYSE.  Alvarez Renta was paid an unspecified sum by the 
Pellerano family for his involvement in the scam.  Pichardo 
asked us for assistance in investigating insider trading and 
violations of SEC regulations and provisions.  (See action 
request below) 
 
8.  (C)  This is not the first time we have heard allegations 
of fraud and insider trading in Tricom.  The former 
Superintendent of Banks, Julio Cross, called on us shortly 
before the inauguration of President Fernandez.  He provided 
us with summaries of the findings in the cases - information 
that the outgoing government turned over to the incoming 
administration - and his analysis that Bancredito and Tricom 
are so closely linked that fraud in one means fraud in the 
other.  He likened Bancredito to Moby Dick and Tricom to 
Captain Ahab\'s ship the Pequod, saying that Moby Dick was 
going under and taking everything attached to it with it. 
 
10.  (SBU)  Additionally, various embassy sources have 
reported that Tricom is on the edge of bankruptcy but the 
Pellerano family is working hard to retain control and keep 
from filing Chapter 11 proceedings in New York.  Most have 
noted the connection among the Pellerano family, Tricom and 
Bancredito and asserted that Tricom must have been subject to 
the same types of fraudulent insider activity as the bank. 
 
11.  (C)  Pichardo also fingered Alvarez Renta in the as yet 
unopened Banco Mercantil case.  Formal charges have not been 
made against anybody in the Banco Mercantil fraud; however, 
Pichardo insisted that in addition to Baninter and 
Bancredito, Alvarez Renta had a hand in receiving unsecured 
lines of credit from Banco Mercantil. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Meanwhile, the Listin Diario tells its own story 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
12.  (SBU)  As part of the Dominican based case against Ramon 
Baez, in late 2003 the Dominican government confiscated the 
assets of the Listin Diario media group; a group comprised of 
numerous media outlets including the Listin Diario, one of 
the top three daily newspapers in the Dominican Republic. 
The Baez defense team challenged the seizure of the assets on 
constitutional grounds.  An appellate level court ordered the 
immediate return of the Listin to the Baez family in April, 
2004.  The Central Bank appealed that decision to the Supreme 
Court which stayed the appellate court order pending review. 
The Supreme Court ordered the GODR to return the Listin 
Diario media group to the Baez family in compliance with the 
appellate court ruling on September 2, 2004.  However, it 
left an opening for further Central Bank legal action.  The 
Supreme Court ordered compliance with the appellate court 
decision to return the assets immediately, but did not rule 
on the constitutional merits of the case.  Under the 
Dominican legal system, the Central Bank can challenge the 
decision on the merits by asking for a separate appeals court 
panel to hear the case.  Pichardo told us that, \"we are 
turning over the Listin (as per the Supreme Court order), but 
we are not giving up.\" 
13. (SBU) The Listin portion of the Baninter case has gotten 
considerable media play, not only in the pages of its own 
paper, but in all Dominican news outlets.  When the 
government seized the media group, it took over publication 
of the Listin Diario.  The content moved from quite 
respectable to slavishly pro-Mejia, at times failing even to 
mention the lead stories found in other outlets.  Both the 
change in administration and the return of the Listin to the 
Baez family have resulted in fewer biased stories and a move 
towards more neutral reporting.  A notably aggressive 
anti-U.S. tone has appeared at times. 
 
14.  (SBU)  If the Central Bank does decide to pursue the 
legal avenues to have the media group re-seized in 
conjunction with the ongoing larger Baninter case, it may be 
an uphill battle.  Although the Central Bank legal team\'s 
premise for initiating the action was that seizure of assets 
was proper under Dominican law, the Baez family has two 
strong alternative defenses: 1) the media group\'s controlling 
interest was owned by Ramon Baez Romano, father of 
\"Ramoncito\", not the subject of a criminal action, therefore 
seizure should be denied, and 2) the due process rights of 
\"Ramoncito\" are violated if the media group is seized prior 
to a finding of guilt on the criminal fraud charges. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Where is the Baninter case now? 
-------------------------------- 
 
15.  (SBU)  While the Listin portion of the Baninter case has 
been in the news, the larger case against the principals has 
slipped a bit from the public spotlight.  The case remains on 
appeal from the findings of the judge of instruction.  A 
three person appellate panel is charged with determining if 
the judge of instruction correctly determined who should go 
to trial and on what charges.  Central Bank legal counsel 
Pichardo says that he believes charges against Alvarez Renta 
should be reinstated.  The decision of the judge of 
instruction numbered over 400 single spaced pages.  The task 
for the appellate court to evaluate that decision and review 
the underlying evidence presented to the judge of instruction 
is a complex undertaking.  That said, two different sources 
in the Attorney General\'s office have told us that they 
believe the decision of the appellate panel will be issued in 
the near future.  If so, we can expect the case to be back on 
the front pages and on the airwaves. 
 
16.  (SBU)  The U.S. based portion of the civil case against 
Luis Alvarez Renta continues.  The Monetary Board voted to 
continue to retain the services of Tew Cardenas, the Miami 
based law firm that filed the civil RICO action against Luis 
Alvarez Renta in the Southern District of Florida.  The 
Central Bank is seeking treble damages plus expenses for 
violations committed by Alvarez Renta and his companies. 
Pichardo is aware that a civil case of this nature can take 
years to make it through the U.S. court system, especially 
when the defendant has deep pockets and is well represented, 
as is the case with Alvarez Renta.  For this reason, Pichardo 
has asked that the U.S. based criminal investigation  against 
Alvarez Renta move at a faster pace.  His trip to the Miami 
was, in part, to meet and present the GODR case to the U.S. 
Attorney for the Southern District of Florida.  (See action 
request below). 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Coordination in the new administration 
--------------------------------------- 
17.  (SBU)  Pichardo also emphasized the administration\'s 
goal of coordinating efforts to \"get the bad guys.\"  Under 
Mejia, coordination among the Central Bank legal team, the 
Santo Domingo District Attorney and the Attorney General was 
abysmal, as evidenced by the fiasco in filing and then 
suspending of charges in the Bancredito case.  Pichardo tells 
us that he has been working closely with the prosecutorial 
arms of the government to improve communication and 
information sharing.  New Attorney General Francisco 
Dominguez Brito echoed the sentiments of Pichardo by saying 
that the bank fraud cases were a priority and that his office 
would be working very closely with the Central Bank attorneys 
in evaluating potential new cases. 
 
--------------- 
Outlook 
--------------- 
 
18.  (C)  The outlook is mixed.  We have heard so often and 
so frequently that the Dominican judicial system will fail in 
the bank fraud cases that it is difficult not to expect the 
worst.  On the bright side, the coordination and cooperation 
among the GODR officials with prosecutorial responsibilities 
is already better than it was during the last year of 
President Mejia\'s term.  The Attorney General\'s office is 
looking into all areas for methods to improve prosecution of 
serious crime.  The Central Bank is \"talking the talk\" and 
continuing with efforts to bring the bank fraud actors to 
justice. 
 
19.  (U)  ACTION REQUEST  Embassy Santo Domingo requests the 
Securities and Exchange Commission consider allegations above 
regarding the recently delisted publicly traded company, 
Tricom, S.A., incorporated in and under the laws of the 
Dominican Republic.  Embassy Santo Domingo requests DOJ/OIA 
ensure that the criminal investigation targeting Baninter 
principals in the Southern District of Florida has been fully 
presented to the U.S. Attorney\'s Office.  Embassy is ready to 
assist SEC investigators in the Tricom/Bancredito case and to 
continue providing assistance to DHS agents and the U.S. 
Attorney for the Southern District of Florida in the Baninter 
case.  Previous cables in the series provide further 
background on the Tricom/Bancredito connection and on the 
Baninter case.  END ACTION REQUEST. 
 
20.  (U)  Drafted by Angela Kerwin. 
 
21.  (U)  This report and others in the series are available 
at our SIPNET classified site 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo< /a>  along with 
extensive other material. 
HERTELL 
"
"21156","9/30/2004 20:37","04SANTODOMINGO5437","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 005437 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR S/S, WHA,WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/30/2010 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC SCENESETTER FOR POSSIBLE VIP 
VISIT 
 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske.  Reason: 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
 1.  Following is a backgrounder for a possible VIP visit to 
the Dominican Republic: 
(U) Background.  The Dominican Republic, just 70 miles from 
Puerto Rico across the treacherous Mona Passage, is a 
heavyweight in the Caribbean, a strong trading partner, and a 
helpful ally in the Caribbean.  The U.S. government has used 
its prestige and resources to assure that elections here are 
conducted fairly and with close international observation. 
We made possible the OAS election observation for the May 
presidential elections with our $225,000 contribution, and we 
spent more than $1 million in USAID funds to support the 
highly effective civil society observations that put 60,000 
trained Dominican observers in the field.  Leonel Fernandez 
knows that we were vital in keeping the May 2004 presidential 
elections honest and thereby in making possible his victory. 
(U) The Returning President.  Leonel Fernandez was president 
during the boom years of 1996-2000, when GDP growth exceeded 
7 percent, thanks to a reorientation to exports just as the 
U.S. economy boomed.  He took office on August 16, 2004 in 
drastically different circumstances -- with 40 percent 
inflation, a weakened currency, widespread electricity 
blackouts, and financial and fiscal disarray, including an 
inoperative IMF standby and a budget deficit for 2004 of more 
than 7 percent of GDP.  He set the tone with a resounding 
inaugural speech promising a new orientation to Dominican 
government, stern enforcement of laws against corruption, 
resolute measures to confront economic crisis, and a new, 
socially conscious and market-friendly approach to 
government.  Fernandez said that the country would pursue 
peace and security through multilateral means, at the UN and 
the Organization of American States. 
(SBU) The inaugural celebration brought a giddy rush of 
confidence in the future.  With this optimism, the peso has 
strengthened nearly 20 percent against the dollar since then, 
and the Central Bank has been able to place its certificates 
for much longer terms at lower rates, suggesting that 
investors believe 40% inflation will evaporate. The 
president,s economic manager, Technical Secretary 
Temistocles Montas and his team have actively consulted with 
the IMF, the U.S. Treasury, the Paris Club and New York 
financial advisors. The new administration has kept up 
payments on sovereign debt and seeks a friendly 
restructuring, stretching out repayment to gain time for 
financial stabilization. 
A New Broom Sweeps 
(SBU) Fernandez appointed to his cabinet a range of 
reasonably qualified, experienced supporters.  Many are in 
the same jobs that they held in his first administration. 
Last time they held office during boom times, when few 
questions were asked.  In the new, grim Dominican reality, 
they will be subjected to closer scrutiny by everyone. 
 (C) Fernandez made excellent choices in appointments in law 
enforcement, especially for Attorney General, Police Chief, 
and head of the Armed Forces.  Last week he responded quickly 
to USG concerns and removed a senior manager in the National 
Intelligence Agency. 
(SBU) Four appointments to high ranked advisory jobs without 
managerial responsibility went to individuals whom the 
previous administration charged with embezzlement but never 
brought to trial.  Fernandez maintains these four were the 
victims of unfounded political persecution. 
Urgent Problems 
(U) This new/old administration is struggling with urgent 
problems.  Chief among them: 
- - (SBU) Getting back to the table with the IMF.  The 
Fernandez team worked hard with cooperation from the outgoing 
administration, to construct a \"fiscal reform package,\" part 
of the effort to get back to negotiations with the IMF. The 
Congress took two months to debate it, water it down, and 
pass it.  Fernandez has announced cuts in government 
expenditures but must do more to repair the budget, likely to 
finish 2004 with a deficit equivalent to more than 7 percent 
of GDP.  IMF technicians visited during the last week of 
September but serious negotiations await convincing Dominican 
actions. 
- - (SBU) Free trade.  Fernandez urges long-term investment 
in education, science, and infrastructure to improve 
competitiveness and strongly endorses the need to get a free 
trade agreement with the U.S. and Central America.  Fiercely 
protectionist sugar interests grafted into his tax reforms a 
25 pct tax on soft drinks and refreshments made with fructose 
-- a measure directly counter to the newly negotiated 
DR-CAFTA free trade agreement and in breach of WTO 
commitments.  The USG has vigorously warned the Dominicans 
that this would be a \"deal killer\" for free trade. Fernandez 
promulgated the bill as delivered while promising to seek 
repeal of the protectionist measure.  He is systematically 
seeking consensus from concerned sectors on an approach to 
placate sugar while still preserving the prospect of an 
agreement. 
- - (SBU) Convincing the Paris Club.  The Paris Club one-year 
deal struck last March for $189 million in rescheduling was 
contingent on government measures for \"comparability of 
treatment\" for private sector creditors.  To date the 
government hasn,t identified its approach to \"comparable 
treatment,\" though it has an offer of a syndicated $100 
million loan through Citibank that might be construed to 
fulfill the requirement.  The Paris Club expects an answer in 
early October. 
- - (SBU) Getting to restructuring.  The government owes 
arrears to bilateral creditors, international financial 
institutions and to the private sector.  Fernandez,s team 
says earnestly that they will clear these, as required by the 
IMF and the Paris Club, and they,ve found funds with which 
to avoid catastrophic defaults on sovereign bonds and 
sovereign guarantees, although at times only by a matter of 
hours.  They are seeking lenders to deposit dollars with the 
Central Bank to bolster reserves. 
- - (C) Solving the crisis of energy supply and pricing.  The 
electricity sector is almost completely without capital. 
Fernandez has borrowed USD 50 million from domestic banks, 
enough to pay a small percentage of overdue government debts 
so generators can purchase fuel over the next three months. 
He says he has asked Venezuela,s Hugo Chavez to sell him 
petroleum at a 25 percent discount over six months, with 
15-year terms for financing.  At best, this might be a 
six-month respite; at worst, it could provide a point of 
leverage for Chavez,s regional political agenda (note, 
however, that Fernandez has shown absolutely no sympathy for 
Chavez,s views).  The administration is seeking to limit the 
costly subsidy on cooking gas only to household purchasers. 
The transport sector could strongly oppose this initiative. 
- - (C) Corruption and Banking Fraud.  Fernandez has very 
good people in law enforcement. Our first in-depth 
discussions suggest that the Central Bank aggressively pursue 
cases against bankers who embezzled breath-taking sums 
(equivalent to 20 pct of 2003 GDP) and thereby caused the 
current financial imbalance.  The Attorney General has barred 
the principal accused from leaving the country.  Assistant 
Secretary Noriega and Ambassador Hertell have urged the need 
 
SIPDIS 
for effective prosecution and exemplary punishment.  U.S. 
authorities have been working with the Central Bank to help 
this happen. 
Your Presence and Your Message 
(U) The Department and the U.S. Government should acknowledge 
and support Fernandez,s efforts to set things right: 
cooperation during the transition, efforts to renew the IMF 
standby and initiatives for reforming subsidies and the 
electricity sector.  He would respond well to a public 
message of U.S. support. Fernandez is an orthodox thinker, 
studious and reaching out for counsel. 
(C) The Ambassador hopes that the Secretary can further 
underscore the importance of the already negotiated free 
trade agreement, which Fernandez declared on September 30 is 
\"important not only for free zone exporters but for the 
economic future of the country.\"  A positive boost from the 
Secretary will strengthen his hand with Congress and better 
 
SIPDIS 
arm him to manage the recalcitrant powerful Dominican sugar. 
(C) Other themes to stress : 
- -  effective economic adjustment is premised on imposing 
austerity quickly and decisively 
- -  corruption undermines democratic institutions, and 
- - the international community expects both executive and 
judicial branches to prosecute and punish those responsible 
for the massive bank frauds that so damaged the country,s 
finances and economy. 
2.  (U) Drafted by Michael Meigs. 
3.  (U) This message and our other series of reporting 
messages can be viewed on on our SIPRNET site 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo< /a> 
along with extensive other material. 
 
HERTELL 
"
"21194","10/1/2004 20:26","04SANTODOMINGO5468","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 005468 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, E, EB, EB/TPP/BTA, HST, 
EB/OMA; NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON;LABOR FOR ILAB; 
USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD;TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, ETRD, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN POLITICS #4: FERNANDEZ AND REPEAL OF TAX 
MEASURE 
 
 
1.  Following is number 4 in our series on the 2004 politics 
of the Fernandez administration: 
 
Fernandez and Repeal of Tax Measure 
 
President Leonel Fernandez signed and promulgated on 
September 28 the tax measures passed by the Dominican 
Congress and submitted to the Dominican Senate on September 
30 a letter and draft legislation to repeal the 25 percent 
tax on beverages made with fructose syrups.  The tax measures 
are in effect today, October 1, since the official gazette 
with notice of the president\'s action appeared yesterday. 
 
At the opening of the Cibao Regional Trade Fair in Santiago, 
following the Ambassador\'s speech on the advantages of free 
trade, President Fernandez rose for ten minutes of impromptu 
remarks. These were carried live in Santiago and widely 
rebroadcast.  He briefly outlined the challenges facing the 
new administration and the fact that it has a minority in the 
Congress.  Again he evoked the benefits of the free trade 
agreement.  \"But we have a little problem,\" he commented.  He 
recognized as valid the concerns of the sugar sector -- \"but 
no one sector of the nation has the right to jeopardize the 
welfare of the rest of the nation.\" The administration would 
propose amending the fiscal reform package.   He favored 
excluding the tax on fructose drinks \"as an obstacle to the 
strategy of competitiveness that will guarantee the progress 
of the country. . . This problem will be overcome in 
democratic fashion -- through reason, persuasion and 
consensus.\" Fernandez suggested that even if the measure is 
not repealed, eventual congressional ratification of the free 
trade agreement, an international instrument, would override 
the tax.  \"By whatever rational and democratic legal means, 
the free trade agreement will prevail here. . . Mr. 
Ambassador, take this message to your government: in whatever 
legal and democratic way possible, we will pass DR-CAFTA.\" 
The trade-friendly crowd gave him a standing ovation and many 
of those nearby reached past the President\'s security detail 
to shake his hand. 
 
The hot defense of national pride and the sugar industry 
remains a theme in press coverage but a new note has 
appeared: a discussion of how to preserve the already 
negotiated free trade agreement. The papers have widely 
reported the postponement of the signing of a DR-CAFTA 
environmental agreement originally scheduled for September 24 
-- as well as the fact that the decision was due to the 
uncertain status of the Dominican portion of the agreement. 
 
Various lawyers have endorsed Fernandez\'s interpretation that 
an international agreement would take precedence domestic 
law.  None has addressed the lengthy and uncertain process by 
which this would be examined and decided, considering that 
the tax was deliberately crafted to elude commitments to 
eliminate tariffs over time.  One entrepreneur suggested that 
soft drink bottlers relocate to the provinces bordering 
Haiti, which recently were granted tax exonerations to boost 
economic development. 
 
Fernandez has said that the mechanisms of the World Trade 
Organization would be more appropriate venues for examining 
trade controversies.  In public discourse he has left vague 
the substance of any eventual discussion or dispute -- 
failing even to indicate which country would be the plaintiff 
and which the defendant.  Despite this,the draft law sets 
forth in preambular language considerations that suggest a 
strategy of seeking a WTO finding that high fructose corn 
syrup presents unfair competition to locally produced sugar 
because it is \"highly subsidized\" (sic). 
 
Following are Embassy Santo Domingo\'s informal translations 
of Fernandez\'s cover letter and the text proposed for the 
law.  The Spanish texts were faxed this morning to the 
Department, USTR and the Treasury. 
 
(begin informal translations) 
 
Leonel Fernandez 
President of the Dominican Republic 
Number 1895             Santo Domingo, National District 
                        September 30, 2004 
Hon. 
Andres Bautista Garcia 
President of the Senate 
Congressional Building 
Santo Dmingo 
 
Dear Mr. President, 
 
On September 28 I promulgated as Law number 288-04 the tax 
reform law intended to reduce the fiscal deficit currently 
confronting the Dominican economy, so that we may comply with 
the negotiations with the International Monetary Fund. 
 
With the aim of correcting possible distortions created by 
the law in question, in respect of our oblgiations in the 
Free Trade Agreement signed on August 5, 2004 with the United 
States and Central American countries, I am submitting 
through you to the senate a draft proposal of law, enclosed, 
which seeks the derogation of paragraph IX of Article 375 of 
Law Number 11-92, as approved by Law 288-04 cited above, 
Article 11, in the understanding that the subject will be 
dealt with at the World Trade Organization and a solution 
will be found there. 
 
I call upon your good offices and those of your fellow 
legislators, with the spirit of maintaining commercial 
practices that are congruent with the multilateral, regional 
and bilateral engagements we have assumed. 
 
God, Country, and Liberty 
 
(signed) 
 
Leonel Fernandez 
 
(end informal translation) 
(begin informal translation of draft law) 
 
DRAFT PROPOSAL OF LAW 
 
Considering that the Congress approved the draft law dealing 
with a tax reform with the aim of reducing the fiscal deficit 
currently confronting the Dominican economy so as to comply 
with the negotiations between the Dominican Goverment and the 
International Monetary Fund, begun on August 5, 2003; 
 
Considering that the Dominican Republic, along with Central 
American countries, signed on August 5, 2004 a Free Trade 
Agreement with the United States, the principal trading 
partner and investor in the region, in which was obtained 
protection for the sugar industry better than that for 
Central America, as concers the basic tariff; 
 
Considering that in the process of negotiating the 
aforementioned Free Trade Agreement on the basis of 
reciprocal and mutual advantage, the Dominican Republic is 
obliged to reduce tariffs for all products, including those 
corresponding to customs subcategories 1702.30 to 1702.90, 
corresponding to glucose syrups containing fructose; 
 
Considering that the parties to the Free Trade Agreement 
among the United States, Central America and the Dominican 
Republic are empowered to agree upon amendments in the texts 
and the annexes of the aforesaid agreement, using the 
appropriate legal procedures; 
 
Considering that the World Trade Organization (WTO) is the 
common institutional framework for reconciling differences, 
in the case of unfair practices that might cause harm or 
serious disadvantage to a sector of national production, when 
resulting from the provision of subsidies or the 
disproportionate surge of imports; 
 
Considering that the Dominican Republic succeeded in 
obtaining at the WTO a Technical Rectification that altered 
its list of concessions to the Most Favored Nation List, via 
which a tariff-quota was set that protects eight agricultural 
products, including sugar; 
 
Considering that cane sugar is one of the four traditional 
products of the agro-exporting sector generating significant 
amounts of foreign exchange and employment and therefore 
should be preserved; 
 
Considering that internal excise taxes are applied currently 
to a small group of products in order to protect the health 
and lives of persons and to conserve natural resources, among 
other purposes, and not as a mechanism to respond to 
anticompetitive practices which prejudice free choice of 
inputs by producers; 
 
Considering that the current administration commits itself to 
see that high fructose syrups, categorized in Customs 
subcategories 1702.30 to 1702.90, extracted from agricultural 
products such as corn that are highly subsidised, will be 
dealt with at the WTO; 
 
Considering that the Dominican Republic should be consistent 
in its commercial practice and in the undertakings assumed on 
the multilateral, regional and bilateral levels, especially 
as concerns the engagements in associated trade agreements, 
in effect or in the process of congressional ratification; 
 
In view of Congressional resolution number 2-95 of January 
20, 1995 ratifying the legal texts of the WTO: 
 
In view of the original texts in Spanish of the Free Trade 
Agreement among the United States, Central America, and the 
Dominican Republic, signed on August 5, 2004; 
 
In view of Law 288-04, promulgated on September 28, 2004, 
approving the tax reform, 
 
CONGRESS ENACTS THE FOLLOWING LAW: 
 
Article 1.  This measure repeals paragraph IX of Article 375, 
modified by Article 11 of Law number 288-04, dated September 
28, 2004 aproving the tax reform, so that the 25 percent 
(sic) on beverages sweetened with corn syrup is eliminated. 
 
Article 2.  The administration commits itself, along with 
national producers, to seek alternative solutions with the 
aim of protecting the Dominican sugar industry. 
 
DATED . . . . (blank) 
 
(end of informal translation) 
2.  Drafted by Michael Meigs 
3.  This report and others in our series can be consulted on 
our SIPRNET site 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo< /a> 
along with extensive other material. 
HERTELL 
"
"21195","10/1/2004 22:22","04SANTODOMINGO5480","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 005480 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E, EB, EB/IFD/OMA, WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC; 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA, TOLOUI, LEE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/01/2014 
TAGS: ECPS, BEXP, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: IMF VISIT TO DOMINICAN REPUBLIC REVEALS LITTLE 
PROGRESS 
 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske.  Reason: 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  An IMF team led by Steven Phillips (protect) 
to Santo Domingo this week reported that the Dominican 
Republic continued to face an acute crisis.  The GODR had 
made only limited progress toward an integrated plan that 
could serve as the basis for resuming its IMF program.  The 
team reported scant evidence that the Dominicans had taken 
adequate concrete steps that would allow negotiations to 
begin.  There was a feeling that some members of the 
Dominican economic team are more open to IMF advice than 
others. Despite the disappointingly slow pace, Phillips did 
see some progress this week, with the government narrowing 
its focus in some areas, and signals that conversations on 
the margins of the Fund/Bank meetings October 2-3 could be 
important for the Fund\'s decision on an appropriate strategy 
for the next (revised) IMF program for the Dominican 
Republic.  End summary. 
 
------------- 
Slow progress 
------------- 
 
2. (C) The visit to Santo Domingo of an IMF technical team 
led by Steven Phillips, September 22-30, was one more in a 
series that started early in the year with the goal of 
reaching a plan that could allow talks aimed at resuming an 
IMF program.  Despite the many visits (most recently one in 
August), Phillips (protect) said that there were still not 
enough concrete details coming from the Dominican side to 
begin formal negotiations.  This was a disappointment after 
what had seemed to be rapid progress early this summer just 
following elections.    The Fund indicated that up to now, it 
has been trying to avoid dictating a detailed plan, 
preferring rather to give guidance to the government and 
letting the government choose its own path.  The slow pace, 
however, is leading Phillips to consider being more forceful 
with his suggestions. 
 
----------------------------- 
Fiscal gap still hard to fill 
----------------------------- 
3. (C) Phillips said that previously, two thirds of the 2004 
gap could have been filled by the Paris Club, and the 
remaining third by the private sector.  The gap is now 
several times greater and continues into 2005, for many 
reasons, including some external causes.  Fiscal slippage and 
higher oil prices have played a role.  The fiscal package 
actually passed, he noted, brings in a full percentage point 
less (i.e. about 1.7 percent of GDP) than the package 
originally submitted to the Dominican Congress in July. 
Arrears are growing.  Additional factors are the slower 
disbursement of IFI funds and the discovery last spring of 
unreported debt.  All in all, bridging the gap remains a 
problem.  The Dominican team has put little on paper about 
how to resolve these issues.  There are still no numbers in 
the Dominican plan that add up and the ideas that the 
government has presented lack specificity.  Nonetheless, 
there was some progress this week, especially by the 
Dominican team\'s developing a matrix of policies and measures 
to reduce expenditures. Again, however, the matrix provided a 
rough sketch of a plan with little specific information. 
Phillips feels that more progress can be made with sustained 
international attention, and that, optimistically, putting 
together a program by the end of October is possible. 
 
--------------------------- 
Paris Club - No information 
--------------------------- 
4. (C) The Dominicans sent a team to New York last week to 
talk with private banks about debt restructuring, but the 
government has not yet chosen any of the options presented 
during the visit (or it perhaps was unwilling to share this 
information with the Fund). As for the October 1 obligatory 
report to the Paris Club, the IMF had no information on what 
the government plans to present. 
 
--------- 
Bank Debt 
--------- 
5. (C) In the banking sector, the IMF team\'s emphasis is on 
coming up with a timetable and assessing weaknesses, a 
process that has also apparently lost pace over the summer. 
Phillips noted that the timetable for implementing banking 
reform had slowed.  Phillips expressed concern that in the 
face of growing domestic and international arrears, the 
government\'s ability to be firm with the banks would be 
undermined by its continuing need for bank loans. 
 
6. (C) While the Central Bank\'s announcement on September 29 
to extend maturities on certificates of deposit and index 
them to inflation is fine in principle, IMF representatives 
received no information beyond what was said in the press 
release.  They saw this as a sign that some members of 
government are not yet fully comfortable with working openly 
with IMF. 
 
--------------- 
Still in Crisis 
--------------- 
7. (C) On the positive side, the IMF team found no 
ideological opposition with planning, just technical issues. 
There were signs, Phillips said, of greater integration. 
Dominicans made some progress this week, as noted above, and 
the peso\'s rise and the decline in inflation are both 
positive signs, for now.  Unfortunately, the  Dominican 
Republic is still in crisis, and it is the single acute 
crisis case in the hemisphere, \"if not in the world,\" 
commented IMF resrep Ousmene Mandeng.  Implementation of 
structural measures in banking slowed during the summer and 
the banking picture remains one of liquidity strength but 
capitalization weakness.  The improving strength of the peso 
and drop in inflation seem at odds with the picture above and 
are threatened by the growing arrears. 
 
8. (C) The IMF team expressed mild concern that some of the 
Dominican team members are not able to coordinate or work 
together effectively.  IMF noted a lack of both vertical and 
horizontal organization and some \"really sharp differences 
and rivalries.\" 
 
----- 
Ahead 
----- 
9. (C)  Under the best of circumstances, Phillips said, 
predicting the timetable for program negotiations is 
difficult.  With a constant IMF presence, it might be 
possible to conclude a revised agreement in October.  The 
conversations in Washington on the margins of the October 2-3 
Bank/Fund meetings could well be important for deciding the 
Fund\'s strategy for a revised program (i.e., how strong a 
program, how front-loaded, what pre-conditions). 
HERTELL 
"
"21251","10/4/2004 21:02","04SANTODOMINGO5501","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE194948","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005501 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR IO/SHA - SYLVIA HAMMOND 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC, PHUM, SOCI, KWMN, DR 
SUBJECT: SECTION 102(G) PEDOPHILIA CERTIFICATION: INSTRAW 
 
REF: STATE 194948 
 
1.  (SBU) Per reftel, Embassy obtained from the UN Institute 
for Training and Advancement of Women (INSTRAW) a list of 385 
NGOs that have some link with INSTRAW, from being on a 
mailing list to, in a few cases, collaborating in research or 
training projects. 
 
2.  (SBU) Embassy has carefully reviewed the list and 
followed up with INSTRAW staff, and finds no rpt noevidence 
that any of these organizations promotes or condones or seeks 
the legalization of pedophilia or includes as a subsidiary or 
member any such organization. 
 
3. (U)  The list of NGOs is being provided separately via 
unclassified e-mail to IO/SHA - Sylvia Hammond. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
4.  (U) Embassy staff spent about three hours fulfilling this 
request. 
HERTELL 
"
"21252","10/4/2004 21:04","04SANTODOMINGO5502","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE209789","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005502 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AC/ISN 
USUN FOR DISDEL 
GENEVA FOR CD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC, PARM, PREL, DR 
SUBJECT: 59TH UNGA: U.S. DRAFT FOR 1ST COMMITTEE DELIVERED 
TO DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
 
REF: STATE 209789 
 
1.  Embassy Santo Domingo on October 4 delivered to MFA 
international organizations deputy director Rhadys Abreu de 
Polanco reftel talking points (as a nonpaper) and U.S. draft 
resolution on improving the effectiveness of the methods of 
work of the First Committee (Disarmament).  She undertook to 
forward the information to the Dominican Republic\'s UN 
Mission, in anticipation of the discussion in New York. 
HERTELL 
"
"21253","10/4/2004 21:05","04SANTODOMINGO5503","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","02STATE48927","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005503 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), L/LEI (FUENTES, TAYLOR) 
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE FOR CRIM/OIA (MAZUREK, ORJALES, 
SOKOHL) 
US MARSHAL SERVICE PLEASE PASS TO C. DUDLEY 
DEA FOR OF, OFI, DO, DOC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CJAN, KJUS, PINR, SNAR, DR 
SUBJECT: FINAL GODR EXTRADITION CASES UNDER PRESIDENT MEJIA 
 
REF: A. 02 STATE 48927 
 
     B. 03 STATE 211404 
     C. 03 STATE 264992 
     D. 03 STATE 264993 
     E. 03 STATE 310979 
     F. 03 STATE 347618 
     G. STATE 65861 
 
1.  (U)  On July 30, 2004, seven fugitives were extradited 
from the Dominican Republic in the company of U.S. Marshals. 
They were as follows: 
 
a.  Gornelio Serrano, reftel A, wanted to stand trial in the 
U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia on federal 
narcotics charges. 
 
b.  Humberto Sanchez, reftel B, wanted to stand trial in the 
U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York on 
federal racketeering, money laundering, narcotics and 
narcotics conspiracy charges. 
 
c.  Esteban Antonio Mercedes Espinal, reftel C, wanted to 
stand trial in the U.S. District Court for the Southern 
District of New York on federal narcotics charges. 
 
d.  Santos Frias Castro, reftel D, wanted to stand trial in 
the U.S. District Court for the  Southern District of New 
York on federal narcotics charges. 
 
e.  Narciso Liriano Alamarante reftel E, wanted to stand 
trial in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of 
Virginia on federal narcotics charges. 
 
f.  Bryant Rodriquez, reftel F, wanted to stand trial in the 
U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York on 
charges of impersonating a federal official and aiding and 
abetting the impersonation of a federal official. 
 
g.  Rahdames Abreu, reftel G, wanted to stand trial in the 
Superior Court of New Jersey, Essex County, on charges of 
armed robbery, kidnapping and unlawful possession of a weapon. 
 
2.  (U)  The Dominican Republic\'s National Drug Control 
Directorate (DNCD) and National Police, working with the 
assistance of U.S. Marshals, DEA agents, and FBI agents, 
arrested all seven fugitives. 
 
3.  (U)  These seven successful extradition cases mark the 
final fugitives extradited under President Hipolito Mejia. 
They are the seventh through thirteenth fugitives extradited 
from the Dominican Republic to the United States in 2004, and 
the 61st through 67th under the administration of President 
Mejia. 
HERTELL 
"
"21482","10/8/2004 23:13","04SANTODOMINGO5603","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE216020","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005603 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, MARR, DR 
SUBJECT: DCI SPECIAL ADVISOR\'S REPORT ON IRAQ WMD: 
INFORMING DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
 
REF: STATE 216020 
 
1. Embassy provided reftel talking points as a non-paper to 
MFA director for U.S. affairs Roger Espaillat on October 8. 
He undertook to share the information with the director of 
Middle East affairs.  Espaillat had no immediate substantive 
reaction, but appreciated having the points available if the 
GODR has or receives questions about the DCI special 
advisor\'s report on Iraq WMD. 
 
2. Media reaction:  To Embassy\'s knowledge, local media 
coverage has been limited to half of an inside page of 
left-of-center daily \"Hoy\" October 8.  This publication ran 
two AFP wire service stories and a sidebar quoting President 
Bush as saying on October 7, \"The Duelfer report makes clear 
that much of the material accumulated over 12 years by our 
Intelligence and that of our allies was erroneous.  We should 
find out why and correct the deficiencies.\" 
HERTELL 
"
"21500","10/12/2004 11:17","04SANTODOMINGO5604","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO5153","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 005604 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EB, CIP/HST(WATTS), WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/OMA; 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON;LABOR FOR ILAB; USCINCSO ALSO 
FOR POLAD;TREASURY FOR OASIA-LUTHER CARTER 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN INTERNAL REVENUE DIRECTOR GENERAL TO 
REVIEW NEW TELECOM TAX 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 5153 
 
1. (U) Summary: During a visit by Ambassador Hertell to 
Director General of Internal Revenue Juan Hernandez, 
Hernandez indicated that the Dominican Republic continues to 
experience difficulties with tax collections and stated his 
intention to clamp down on tax cheats.  He responded to the 
Ambassador\'s inquiry about the new excise tax on 
telecommunications with a promise to review the first 3 
months to evaluate the effects on telecom turnover.  If the 
demand for telecommunication services turns out to be highly 
elastic, as argued by the telecoms, Hernandez said that his 
office will consider proposing modification of the tax.  End 
summary. 
 
------------------- 
Collection Problems 
------------------- 
 
2.  (SBU) On September 30 the Ambassador, DCM and embassy 
staff discussed challenges facing the new Director General of 
Internal Revenue.  Hernandez, who had served in the same 
position under President Fernandez,s first administration, 
said that despite the economic crisis he relished the 
opportunity to address today\'s problems.  He noted that 
during his earlier tenure, his office had doubled tax 
collections largely using technology upgrades to catch those 
intent on cheating the system.  He acknowledged the need to 
renew collection efforts and shared his philosophy that by 
catching those who abuse the system his agency will build 
confidence and goodwill among honest taxpayers. 
 
3. (SBU)  The Ambassador asked about the greatest needs of 
the Dominican Internal Revenue Office.  Hernandez said that 
collections and audit procedures are his greatest challenges. 
 He also indicated that the Dominican Republic is interested 
in participating in a tax information exchange agreement with 
the United States.  The Director General\'s office is 
preparing a letter for Treasury Under Secretary Taylor 
providing specific details about the assistance requested and 
confirming the government\'s interest in an information 
exchange agreement. 
 
4. (SBU) Regarding widespread tax evasion, Hernandez 
indicated that one of the sectors experiencing the most 
significant problems is the rapidly growing tourism sector. 
Many operators sell tour packages abroad for one price and 
then declare a lower price to the Dominican authorities for 
tax purposes.  Hernandez hopes that assistance in the form of 
training and an information exchange agreement will help 
ensure that tax collection on tourism revenues is based on 
actual revenue realized.   He said that he also plans to give 
special attention to non-taxable interest earned on deposits 
with the Central Bank.  This year, tax-free yields on money 
invested with the Central Bank ranged upwards of 50 percent. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Willing to Review New Telecom Taxes in the New Year 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
5.  (U) The Ambassador raised the subject of the new 10 
percent excise tax on telecommunications, asking whether the 
government had given serious consideration to the argument by 
the telecommunication companies that the rate chosen would 
have a negative effect on collections due to high elasticity 
of demand for telecom services.  Hernandez agreed that the 
sector was being particularly hard hit by new taxes, not only 
by the new excise tax but also by the increase in value added 
tax from 12 percent to 16 percent.  This is effectively a 100 
percent tax increase for telecommunication companies 
operating in the country (reftel).  He noted that the 
industry was chosen for the new tax precisely because of its 
strong growth and revenues, at a time when the Dominican 
Republic desperately needs cash to help resolve its economic 
crisis.  He indicated that his office plans to review the 
collections from the telecom sector at year end, after three 
months under the new tax regime.  If the demand for 
telecommunication services turns out to be highly elastic, as 
argued by the telecoms, Hernandez said, his office will 
consider proposing modification of the tax. 
 
6. (U)  Speaking specifically about Verizon, the largest 
investor in the Dominican telecommunications sector, Director 
General Hernandez told the Ambassador that he was surprised 
to learn that for tax purposes in the Dominican Republic the 
company declares itself as 90 Canadian and 10 percent U.S. 
Because the Dominican Republic has a tax equalization treaty 
with Canada but not with the United States, the revenue 
Verizon collects as a Canadian firm is taxed at 18 percent 
versus the 25 percent tax collected on the portion it 
realizes as a U.S. company.  Hernandez said that his office 
was reviewing what implications, if any, this would have. 
HERTELL 
"
"21677","10/15/2004 17:37","04SANTODOMINGO5671","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SECSTATE215870","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005671 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CCA, WHA/CAR, IO/UNP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, ETRD 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC - DEMARCHE AGAINST CUBA\'S 
EMBARGO RESOLUTION 
 
REF: SECSTATE 215870 
 
1. (SBU)  EcoPol chief delivered demarche and talking points 
on Cuba\'s embargo resolution to Deputy Foreign Minister 
Alejandra Liriano on October 14. EcoPol chief recalled the 
Dominican Republic\'s help in passing the Cuba resolution at 
the UN Human Rights Commission.  Liriano heard out the 
presentation and commented only that the Ministry had not yet 
seen the text of any resolution. She undertook to pass the 
non-paper along to the the Minister. 
HERTELL 
"
"21678","10/15/2004 18:22","04SANTODOMINGO5672","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE218465","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005672 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR IO/UNP - LARRISA DAVIS, GAYATRI PATEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KJUS, KAWC, PHUM, DR 
SUBJECT: U.S. NOMINEE FOR ICTY - DEMARCHE TO DOMINICAN 
REPUBLIC 
 
REF: STATE 218465 
 
Embassy economic and political counselor on October 14 
delivered reftel demarche on Judge Theodor Meron\'s candidacy 
for reelection as a permanent judge of the International 
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) to Deputy 
Foreign Secretary Alejandra Liriano.  She undertook to 
consider our request, but had no immediate substantive 
response. 
HERTELL 
"
"21738","10/18/2004 16:00","04SANTODOMINGO5696","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE223457","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005696 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, WHA/OAS, WHA/CEN, WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM, PGOV 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN RESPONSE: CONVOKING A SPECIAL SESSION OF 
THE OAS PERMANENT COUNCIL ON NICARAGUA. 
 
REF: SECSTATE 223457 
 
1.Foreign Minister Carlos Morales Troncoso informed PolEcon 
counselor on October 17 that he had been in Central America 
the previous day and had signed a declaration by foreign 
ministers on the subject of the political situation in 
Nicaragua.  He expressed thanks for word of the U.S. position 
and said that the Dominican Republic was ready to participate 
fully in the OAS efforts. 
KUBISKE 
"
"21747","10/18/2004 21:43","04SANTODOMINGO5718","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE205022","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005718 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS TO PM/DTCC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, ETTC, KOMC, KSEP 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: BLUE LANTERN OFFICER CONTACT 
INFORMATION 
 
REF: STATE 205022 
 
1.  Embassy Santo Domingo designates following officer to be 
responsible for oversight of the Blue Lantern Program in the 
Dominican Republic: 
 
Name: Stephen S. Wheeler 
Position: Chief, Economic Unit 
Telephone:  809-731-4293 
Fax.: 809-686-4038 
E-mail:wheelers@state.gov 
Estimated Departure Date: July 2007 
 
2. Given past experience with Blue Lantern checks in the 
Dominican Republic, Embassy will generally be able to 
complete checks within the time limit established in 
Department guidance. 
HERTELL 
"
"21798","10/19/2004 17:14","04SANTODOMINGO5727","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE220252","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 005727 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS USTR FOR VARGO,RYCKMAN, MALITO, CRONIN; DEPT FOR 
WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/TPP/BTA; NSC FOR SHANNON AND 
MADISON; 
USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD;TREASURY FOR OASIA-LCARTER 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/04/2014 
TAGS: ETRD, PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DEMARCHES TO DOMINICANS ON HIGH FRUCTOSE CORN SYRUP 
 
REF: STATE 220252 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske.  Reason:  1.4 (a) and (d). 
 
1.  (U)  Summary.  EcoPol counselor delivered talking points 
urging rapid repeal of the 25 percent 
tax on fructose-sweetened drinks to Deputy Foreign Minister 
Alejandra Liriano on 
October 14.  She accepted the document and undertook to pass 
it on.  EcoPol counselor 
and poloff met Senator Alejandro Santos, chair of the special 
committee 
considering repeal, on October 18.  Santos said that the 
7-member committee appointed to 
study the repeal measure is stacked in favor of the FTA, but 
that the votes are not yet there 
 in the broader Senate to pass the repeal measure.  He and 
other Senators continue to work 
toward repeal.  Santos released to the press on October 19 
the text of USTR Amb. Zoellick\'s 
October 4  letter to U.S. congressional leaders counseling 
against inclusion of the 
Dominican Republic in CAFTA if the 25 percent tax is 
retained. End summary. 
 
2.  (C) EcoPol counselor delivered reftel talking points 
urging rapid repeal of the 25 percent 
tax on fructose-sweetened drinks to Deputy Foreign Minister 
Alejandra Liriano on 
October 14.  She accepted the document and undertook to pass 
it on. 
 
3.  (C) On Monday, October 18, after senators returned from 
their constituencies, EcoPol 
counselor and poloff met with Senator Alejandro Santos (PRD - 
Salcedo), president of 
the Senate Trade Committee and chair of the special committee 
appointed by Senate 
President Bautista to examine the draft proposal to repeal 
the 25 percent tax. Santos, 
a proponent of the free trade agreement (FTA), initially 
asked whether there 
was any prospect that the U.S. authorities might offer to 
show some flexibility concerning the 
desires of the sugar sector -- as a means of moving enough 
senators away from their previous 
vote, delivered less than 3 weeks ago.  Emboffs told him that 
there was no chance; 
the decision of President Fernandez to appeal directly to 
President Bush on behalf of the 
sugar sector had further diminished Dominican credibility in 
Washington.  Every day that passed 
was reducing the chances for the Dominican Republic. 
Planning for regional meetings on 
sanitary and phytosanitary standards did not include the 
Dominican Republic, and unless 
the tax were repealed quickly, the country would not be 
included in December consultations 
on trade capacity building.  Santos asked whether there might 
be some prospect of 
help, however modest, that would permit the sugar sector to 
adjust to losses caused by 
the FTA; emboffs said that was highly unlikely, given the 
vigorous attacks of the sector 
over a period of months. 
 
4.  (C)  Santos says that the 7-member committee appointed to 
study the repeal measure is 
stacked in favor of the FTA, with only one firm proponent of 
the 25 percent tax.  For now, 
however, he does not see sufficient votes for repeal in the 
broader Senate.  The committee 
heard out sugar sector representatives this morning and plans 
to meet with the association 
of free zone manufacturers (ADOZONA), who made a vigorous 
public presentation on 
October 13 arguing the need to preserve jobs and promote 
competitiveness with the FTA. 
He expects to meet again with ADOZONA president Arturo 
Peguero and to urge the industrialists 
to approach their legislators in systematic fashion to argue 
in favor of repeal and the FTA.In 
his public comments Santos stresses \"the need to save the 
FTA.\" 
 
5.  (C)  Emboffs discussed with Santos the full set of 
talking points (reftel) and again stressed 
the urgency of the measure.  The agreement with the Dominican 
Republic is only one part 
of a much wider trade strategy for the United States; further 
delay could well lead to a 
situation in which the advantage of the \"demonstration 
effect\" to other trade partners of dropping the country 
for manifest inability to deliver on its commitments could 
outweigh the diminishing interest 
in keeping the Dominican Republic. 
 
6. (C) Santos concluded that the committee has less time to 
act than members had thought.  Some 
had suggested waiting until after the U.S. elections, he 
commented -- a notion that emboffs 
dismissed as dangerous and counterproductive.  Santos will 
suggest that Senate president Andres 
Bautista invite the Ambassador to meet soon with the full 
Senate of 32 members, in closed session 
in Bautista\'s office.  He believes that the most effective 
approach would be to focus on the 
advantages to the country of the FTA, avoiding polemics. 
 
7.  (SBU) Santos inquired whether he might release to the 
press the text of USTR Amb. Zoellick\'s 
letter of October 4 to U.S. congressional leaders 
transmitting CAFTA texts and recommending against 
inclusion of the Dominican Republic if the tax is retained. 
Emboffs encouraged him to do so, and 
the story ran prominently in all major newspapers on October 
19, along with Santos\' comment to 
journalists about the \"need to save the FTA.\" 
 
 
HERTELL 
"
"21822","10/20/2004 11:10","04SANTODOMINGO5740","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO1606","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 005740 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/ESC; DEPT PASS 
USAID/LAC; DEPT PASS DOE; NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON;LABOR 
FOR ILAB;SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD;TREASURY FOR OASIA-LCARTER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, ECON, ENRG, PGOV, EINV 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTRICITY: THE LAZARUS EFFECT 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 01606 
 
1. Summary (SBU) The Dominican electrical sector is still in 
great difficulty. Generation is running consistently below 
peak demand. Blackouts occur regularly, although they are 
less prolonged than in the last days of the Mejia 
administration.  The government is keeping the lights through 
the end of the year on with money borrowed from Dominican 
commercial banks.  The strapped Dominican government is 
rationing payments to electricity producers, providing just 
enough for purchases of increasingly expensive fuel.  USAID 
and the World Bank are supporting a government effort to 
define a stabilization plan.  With no sign of any profit 
until at least the end of 2005, U.S. firm AES is close to 
selling off its generating and distributing operations. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Chunky payments 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
2. (U) When Leonel Fernandez took office on August 16,  power 
output had been running as low as 700 megawatts (MW), less 
than half of the daily peak demand of around 1600 MW.  This 
meant 12-20 hour blackouts across the country. The new 
administration obtained a USD 65 million loan to purchase 
fuel for the sector, coordinated by Santo-Domingo-based Banco 
Popular.  Most was to purchase fuel (USD 50 million) and the 
rest was for bottled cooking gas (USD15 million).  The plan 
is to spend roughly USD 10 million a month on fuel for power 
plants.  One unforeseen issue with the program is that the 
generators need to purchase fuel in bulk and these limited 
payments are not enough to buy a full shipment.  The 
consequence has been that generators have to hold the cash 
until they have enough for a full shipload -- purchased on 
the spot market at a premium.   The first disbursements from 
the loan were made in September. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
Current generation 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
3. (U) The most recent statistics show that the system is 
typically producing between 1100 and 1200 megawatts in the 
early morning hours.  This is similar to or better than what 
we\'ve seen for much of the past year, and it means that much 
of the country suffers sporadic blackouts.   The system is 
decapitalized, burdened with debts of between USD 400m and 
450m.   Distributors fail to collect sufficient funds with 
which to pay generators, due to the continued high rate of 
theft and the simple refusals to pay by many users.  The 
government consistently fails to cover promised subsidies. 
Without payments the generators cannot rapidly replenish the 
imported fuel needed for generating the electricity. 
 
4.  (U) Currently, distribution companies, Edeste (run by 
AES) and government-owned Edenorte and Edesur (formerly run 
by Union Fenosa of Spain), lose about 40 percent of the 
electricity that they distribute, a quarter of that from 
technical losses and the rest coming from theft.  Collections 
for power delivered and billed range from 66-77 percent for 
the distribution companies. Users have few incentives to pay 
and continue to tap into lines illegally or ignore bills. 
Encouraging the theft and hindering collections are rules 
that prohibit distributors from cutting off power for 
non-payment; companies have to pass through an arduous legal 
process involving the courts. 
- - - - - - - - - - 
Trying to renegotiate, again 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
5. (U) Rhadames Segura,  Director of Dominican electricity 
agency CDEEE has said publicly that the government intends to 
re-negotiate the contracts with the generating companies. 
Still starved of cash, it has nothing to offer the companies 
in those talks in exchange for a permanent lowering of 
contract rates. The figure previously negotiated with most 
generators in the Madrid Accords, now essentially defunct, 
was about USD 200, to be financed by the World Bank -- but 
the government\'s failure to stay on track with the IMF 
blocked that lending program.  A USAID-supported study on the 
prospects for the sector is almost ready for discussion with 
sector participants.  It will offer all of them, including 
U.S. companies such as AES, Cogentrix, El Paso and Seaboard, 
a better basis for determining whether they will want to 
renegotiate. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
AES - Getting Out of Dodge 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
6. (SBU) Julian Nebreda of AES-Dominican Republic and Blair 
Thomas, Managing Director of the Trust Company of the West 
(TCW), a California based private financial services firm, 
told the Ambassador on July 28 that AES would sell its 50 
percent holding of electrical distribution company Edeste for 
an undisclosed amount.  AES will continue to manage Edeste 
for TCW.  On October 8, George Dewey, Chief Commercial 
Officer of Coffeyville Resources of Kansas City, told the 
Ambassador of interest in purchasing other AES assets - - the 
500 MW complex named AES Andres and Los Mina and its Itabo 
partnership with El Paso and Globaleq with up to 650 MW of 
generation capacity. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - 
Energy Shortage Leads to Expensive Schemes 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - 
 
7. (SBU) Press accounts have the GODR inquiring about the 
purchase of two 500 MW coal burning power plants that were 
originally intended for India but are waiting in Houston for 
a buyer.  Each power plant costs USD 750 million and would 
notionally be located on the north side of the country near 
Monti Cristi.  Smith Enron (future name: Prisma) currently 
has the only major power plant in the north, with 185MW of 
capacity in Puerto Plata.  The proposal to import more 
generating capacity is a non-solution.  At the moment the 
Dominican Republic has plenty of capacity - - the compound 
problem is debt, non-collection, a lack of direction and 
uncertainty about the government\'s  intentions. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- 
Stabilizing Dominican Electricity until December 2005 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- 
 
8. (U) USAID in collaboration with the World Bank is 
financing work on a plan to stabilize the Dominican 
electrical sector over the period running to December 2005. 
The study is under discussion with sector participants and 
will probably  be submitted to President Fernandez later this 
week (October 20-22).  The plan is a minimal proposal, 
intended to keep the lights on over the next 18 months: it 
does not address the issue of debt repayment to the 
generating or distribution companies.  It is focused 
initially on the need to stop the continued accumulation of 
losses. It includes the rationale and recommendations for 
raising rates, reducing technical losses and piracy, 
increasinge collections and reducing subsidies. If consensus 
is possible, this aproach would be the basis for seeking 
multilateral bank financing to cover a financing gap 
estimated at 200-300 million dollars.  The draft plan does 
not pretend to be a cure-all; it would require a technical 
and financing miracle to get this Lazarus to rise and walk. 
Instead, the plan aims at providing electricity to meet 75 
percent of demand expected over a 24-hour period.  To help 
encourage payment, the proposal recommends rationing power 
and allocating it to areas of the country according to their 
records of payment. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- 
Intrasector Debt Drags On 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- 
 
9.  (U) There is currently an accumulated intrasector debt of 
USD 400m to 450m for the Dominican electricity grid.  In 2002 
the distribution companies were able to collect about 12 
cents of the 14 cents it cost to generate electricity.  By 
2003 the three distributors were able to collect only 7 to 8 
cents while the cost of generation rose to between 16 to 18 
cents a KWH.  This huge discrepancy resulted from several 
factors: tariffs paid to generators are fixed in dollars, as 
are fuel prices;  the peso rapidly devalued from 18 pesos to 
55 pesos to the dollar over the last two years without no 
corresponding adjustment of peso tariffs;  the government 
made a political decision in April 2003 to subsidize 
electricity, despite its lack of resources to cover these 
payments; the government\'s response to massive bank frauds in 
2003 led to a multiplication of public sector debt and 
further hampered its ability to pay;  and the fact that more 
than 50 percent of users do not pay their electric bills. 
Private and public sector collections by distribution 
companies are equivalent to only about 48 percent of 
potential. 
 
10.  (U) There is general agreement on the level of debts 
except for a dispute between AES-managed Edeste and the 
government corporation CDEEE.  A 50 million dollar difference 
in calculations is due to two factors: a dispute on whether 
Edeste should pay for government-installed substations, and 
the cost of the government-imposed lag of two months between 
billings and receipt of payment. Edeste maintains that 
standard business practice allows for no more than a 30-day 
payment delay and that the CDE should pay for the financing 
cost of the extra month.  The lag is especially costly 
because of the sharp increase in peso interest rates after 
mid-2003 and the uncertainties of the exchange rate. 
 
11. (U) Drafted by Mark Kendrick 
 
12. (U) This report and others can be read on the SIPRNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ index.cfm along 
with extensive other current material. 
HERTELL 
"
"21852","10/20/2004 18:32","04SANTODOMINGO5757","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE184238","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 005757 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/TPP/ABT (HEARTNEY); 
COMMERCE FOR ITA/OTEXA MARIA D\'ANDREA; 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON, ELAB, ETRD, KTEX, DR, EINV 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN TEXTILES - PROSPECTS FOR PRODUCTION AND 
LABOR 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 184238 
 
     B. FAX KENDRICK/USDOC 04OCT2004 
 
1. Embassy Santo Domingo  provides the following information 
in response to reftel. 
 
2. Nominal GDP in billions of USD 
FY 2002  21.6 
FY 2003  16.8 
 
Nominal Manufacturing GDP (industrial production) in billions 
of USD 
FY 2002  3.48 (16.1 percent of total GDP) 
FY 2003  2.57 (15.3 percent of total GDP) 
 
3. Total textiles and apparel production in millions of USD 
FY 2002 2,241.4 
FY 2003 2,201.7 
 
4. Textiles and apparel\'s share of the Dominican Republic\'s 
imports and exports 
 
Exports (percentage) 
FY 2002 43.4 
FY 2003 40.5 
 
Imports (percentage) 
FY 2002 17.4 
FY 2003 18.9 
 
5. Total manufacturing employment 
FY 2002 441,301 (14.2 percent of total employment) 
FY 2003 455,994 (14.7 percent of total employment) 
 
Sources: Banco Central and the Consejo Nacional de Zonas 
Francas de Exportacion. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
TEXTILE AND APPAREL PRODUCTION IMPORTANT FOR DOMINICAN ECONOMY 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
6. Textile and apparel production is very important to the 
Dominican economy as it constitutes 13 percent of overall 
production in the economy and provides more than 150,000 jobs 
in a country of 8.2 million people.  In 2003, total foreign 
investment in the free zone textile sector amounted to 448.7 
million dollars.  U.S. investment in free-zone textile 
facilities was 153 million dollars or 34.2 percent of the 
free zone total. Textiles are an essential part of the 
Dominican economy. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
FREE ZONES DOMINATE TEXTILE AND APPAREL PRODUCTION 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
7.  Most textile based employment is concentrated in 269 
enterprises in free-zone manufacturing activity throughout 
the country.  Most free zones are located in Santiago and 
Santo Domingo. In 2003, textile manufacturers outside of the 
free zones produced only 8.3 million dollars worth of 
production of a 2.2 billion dollar industry or 3.7 percent of 
textile production. The government-run Consejo Nacional de 
Zonas Francas de Exportacion (CNZFE) generally collects 
textile employment data on a quarterly basis though in some 
years it has been collected only every six months.  Each 
quarter CNZFE officials send out by fax requests for 
employment statistics from all textile enterprises in the 
country.  The response rate averages around 90 percent.  The 
Executive Director of CNZFE, Luisa Fernandez, volunteered 
that the CNZFE has the ability to collect monthly data if 
necessary. Once a year five officials from CNZFE conduct 
visits and collect census data from all free zone textile 
enterprises. During these census visits CNZFE officials 
compile employment and production statistics.  CNZFE is 
financially supported both by the government and by free zone 
enterprises and appears to have the resources to produce 
accurate statistics on textile production and employment. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
ESTIMATED 48,000 JOBS WOULD BE LOST AFTER QUOTA ELIMINATION 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
8. A USAID-financed study done by Nathan Associates in 
September 2004, estimates that the Dominican Republic\'s free 
zone textile and apparel industry will lose 48,628 direct 
jobs because of quota elimination and macroeconomic and 
financial conditions. (Note: since the USAID report the peso 
has appreciated by 42 percent relative to the dollar in the 
months of September and October)  Ratification and 
implementation of a free trade agreement could mitigate these 
textile job losses, reducing them by almost 60 percent to 
23,346 jobs.  This analysis finds that if Dominican producers 
can become more cost-effective, meet buyer demands for 
full-package service, and streamline production chains, they 
will boost their competitve position in the U.S. market and 
could further reduce or even avoid job losses. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
COMMENT AND POSSIBLE COURSES OF ACTION FOR DOMINICAN TEXTILES 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
9. Studies available to the embassy suggest that as a result 
of the ending of textile quotas as of January 2005, apparel 
shipments from the Dominican Republic will decline by 31 
percent, resulting in a direct employment loss in the sector 
of 36,853 jobs.  Higher costs related to the economic crisis, 
including new taxes and higher energy prices, will result in 
the loss of another 11,775 jobs in the sector - for total 
direct job losses of 48,628.  A possible 10 percent 
appreciation of the Chinese renminbi could reduce the 
Dominican Republic\'s job losses by an estimated 2,750 jobs. 
In contrast, ratification and implementation of the trade 
agreement with the United States and the Central American 
states would mean direct job losses of 23,346 and a reduction 
of shipments by 419 million dollars. Dominican enterprise and 
the Dominican government could ameliorate these prospects by 
resorting to the following strategies: 
 
(a) assisting small and medium size firms to share resources 
and knowledge, 
(b) ratifying the free trade agreement and implementing its 
provisions, 
(c) designing and coordinating domestic policies on wages, 
taxes, and energy costs so as to maintain competitiveness and 
encourage new investments, 
(d) diversifying production from products with significant 
quota protection to products with significant tariff 
protection, 
(e) diversifying into new appararel markets, and 
(f) diverisfying exports away from textiles and apparel. 
 
10. (U) Drafted by Mark Kendrick. 
 
11. (U) This report and others can be read on the SIPERNET at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ indez.cfm along 
with extensive other current material. 
HERTELL 
"
"21856","10/20/2004 22:47","04SANTODOMINGO5777","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04SANTODOMINGO5468|04SANTODOMINGO5605","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 005777 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/OMA, INR; 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON;LABOR FOR ILAB; USCINCSO ALSO 
FOR POLAD;TREASURY FOR OASIA-LCARTER 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/17/2009 
TAGS: PGOV, PINR, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN POLITICS #6:  THE PRD: IT\'S BROKE.  FIX 
IT. 
 
REF: A. SANTO DOMING 5302 
     B. SANTO DOMINGO 5468 
     C. SANTO DOMINGO 5605 
 
Classified By: ECOPOL Counselor Michael Meigs for Reason 1.5 (b) and (d 
). 
 
 1. (SBU) This is #6 in our current series on politics in the 
Dominican Republic: 
 
The PRD: It,s Broke.  Fix It. 
 
(U)  ** Without Hipolito Mejia to hold it together, the 
venerable populist PRD is not mounting a coordinated response 
to Leonel Fernandez\'s PLD administration. We look at the 
contending personalities and the efforts to heal the wounds 
-- and identify some potential PRD leaders in the upcoming 
generation. ** 
 
(U) Now in opposition, the Dominican Revolutionary Party is 
fragmented.  Former president Hipolito Mejia shows little 
interest in the party, and its lesser leaders snipe in the 
media.  Followers of ousted party president Hatuey de Camps 
continue to squat in the party headquarters, forcing the 
\"legitimate\" PRD to meet at another location.  There are at 
least two candidates to head the party, but the political 
committee on October 19 decided to limit a November 28 
convention of delegates to revising the party statutes and 
postpone an \"ordinary convention\" (national balloting to 
elect party officers) until February. 
 
(U) On paper the PRD dominates Congress, with 29 of 32 
senators and 72 of 150 representatives.  But party discipline 
has virtually disappeared, leaving the PRD as legislative 
opposition rudderless. 
 
Senators Refuse to Be Whipped 
 
(U) On September 21 and 23, party leaders Tony Raful and 
Vicente Sanchez Baret pressed senators to exclude from tax 
reform legislation an anti-trade protectionist tax favoring 
sugar interests, directly counter to the free trade agreement 
signed with the United States and Central American countries 
just six weeks before.  Sanchez Baret,s talk of expelling 
dissidents from the party angered PRD senators and was taken 
as a challenge to the leadership of Senate President Andres 
Bautista (PRD).  On a first reading, 14 senators defied 
Sanchez Baret; on the second, 19 did so. 
 
(C) Apprised the previous day of the threat to the bilateral 
trade agreement, Mejia had told  the Ambassador that with a 
few days of work he could counter it.  He then he left town. 
That same evening the senators approved the tax package, 
complete with the offending tax. 
 
What Must Be Done? 
 
(U) The PRD political committee met October 6 to begin 
organizing a party referendum and convention.  As 
vice-president of the party Mejia made his first public 
appearance since leaving office, sitting alongside aging 
former president Salvador Jorge Blanco.  He blustered in 
jocular fashion with the press, as usual, but offered no cure 
for the party,s disorganization.  He disclaimed any interest 
in seeking the party presidency. 
 
(U) Other PRD figures have called for \"renovation\" or 
\"restructuring\" of the PRD, and some acknowledge mistakes 
under Mejia,s leadership.  But as the Fernandez 
administration moves smartly to investigate charges of 
malfeasance, many in the PRD are feeling vulnerable.  The 
party as a whole is on the defensive, complaining that the 
new administration has failed to respect Mejia appointments 
to permanent positions, insisting that last-minute pension 
decisions be respected, and denying that PRD rowdies are 
contributing to the perceived \"crime wave\" across the 
country. 
 
(C) Without Mejia,s rough charisma, his \"PPH\" faction no 
longer has any coherence.  Acting PRD president Tony Raful on 
September 28 expressed doubt to poloff the party could hold 
its balloting for party officers (\"ordinary convention\") in 
November as scheduled.  On October 20, the PRD Political 
Committee announced a decision, to be confirmed, to postpone 
the party election until February 27; as an innovation, all 
registered party members -- not just local and provincial 
leaders -- will be able to vote.  A convention of delegates 
November 28 will be limited to revising the party statutes. 
PRD vice president Tirso Mejia-Ricart, on the organizing 
committee, told poloff October 14 that he favored using the 
November convention to elect new electoral precinct 
committees, 
 
(U) There is no clear path to reunification.  Former VP 
Ortiz-Bosch reminded the press that the PRD has bounced back 
before, from equally divisive confrontations in the 1980s 
between Jose Francisco Pena Gomez and Jacobo Majluta.  But 
many, including Senate vice-president Cesar Matias, refuse to 
reach out to Hatuey De Camps and his followers, who were 
expelled in May for openly campaigning alongside the PLD 
against Mejia,s re-election.  To develop options for the 
future, former vice president Milagros Ortiz-Bosch -- who 
chairs a committee to organize the convention and modernize 
the party -- directed that a 40-question referendum of PRD 
members be held nationwide starting October 16-17, an 
undertaking that she characterized as a 
\"consultation-self-criticism\" on the party\'s errors and what 
is to be done. 
 
The Tired, The Discredited, and The Contentious 
 
(C) New faces are needed.  Senior leaders are familiar, 
spent, or beyond stump politics. 
Ortiz-Bosch was indecisive and then half-hearted in 
campaigning for Mejia.  PRD secretary-general Rafael \"Fello\" 
Subervi has a reputation for sleaze, not offset at all by his 
belated acceptance of the VP slot on Mejia,s ticket.  On 
October 15, Subervi told the press he \"does not aspire to a 
position as a party officer.\"  Former labor minister Milton 
Ray Guevara, amending the party statutes, is a fine legal 
scholar and smooth operator, praised for his chairmanship of 
the ILO annual general meeting in June.  But he lacks a wide 
or deep following in the party. 
 
(C) Other rivals last year for the presidential nomination 
are regional barons or simply pretenders.  These include 
Senator Ramon Alburquerque of Monte Plata, Jose Rafael 
Abinader, and Emmanuel Esquea, who has just announced his 
candidacy for party president -- evidence that perpetual 
optimism overlooks hard facts. 
 
(SBU) PRD congressional leaders have good reputations within 
and outside the PRD.  Senate president Andres Bautista showed 
in the tax reform standoff that he will insist on respect, 
however many years he has supported Mejia and the PPH. 
Chamber of Deputies president Alfredo Pacheco won re-election 
without opposition this past August, demonstrating his 
effectiveness across party lines.  Both will have a voice in 
the party,s revival; neither shows ambition for higher 
elective office. 
(C) That leaves the devil they all know -- Hatuey De Camps, 
still recognized by his clique as party president.  Hatuey 
met last week with a small faction of friendly PRD senators 
who think that, with his handsome tiger face and offer of an 
\"olive branch,\" he can be sold as a figure of principle 
capable of winning back the presidency in 2008. 
Mejia-Ricart, another aspirant to be party president, 
commented privately that Hatuey is no more likely than Mejia 
to unify or modernize the PRD. 
 
(U) Hatuey assembled his faction on October 9 to announce to 
the public a plan for PRD reunification.  He has strength 
within provincial party commands across the country.  He 
speaks of holding his own \"convention,\" in disregard of the 
structures of the mainline PRD. 
 
A New Generation 
 
(SBU) Eventually the PRD will have to hand off to a new 
generation, but to whom? 
 
- - (SBU) Orlando Jorge Mera, son of President Jorge Blanco 
(1982-86), served as director of the Dominican 
Telecommunications Agency (INDOTEL) and coordinator of the 
Commission on Intellectual Property Rights.  He is young, 
smooth, and English-speaking.  But he has yet to leap from 
the role of competent technocrat to that of politician.  His 
recent op-ed piece on \"challenges to the PRD\" lapsed into 
platitudes. 
 
- - (C) Miguel Vargas Maldonado, former minister of public 
works, is a possibility, but will have to \"prove himself 
innocent\" of graft to skeptical Dominican voters. 
 
- - (SBU) Julio Cury, a young and well-spoken hatueycista 
attorney, has been prominent recently on television talk 
shows, expressing indignation about corruption and urging the 
new administration to \"save the party system of democracy\" by 
vigorously prosecuting Mejia administration officials.  His 
may not be a strategy for short-term victory, but in a 
country tired of corruption he may be building a reputation 
for the future. 
 
- - (SBU) Senator Alejandro Santos, chairman of the industry, 
trade, and free zones committee, could be positioned for 
influence.  He also chairs the special committee to examine 
Fernandez,s proposed revocation of the protectionist tax on 
fructose drinks.  Santos was briefly on the Foreign Ministry 
staff before serving as appointed governor of rural Salcedo 
province, 2001-2002. 
 
The Short Haul 
 
(SBU) Modernizing the PRD,s organization and procedures may 
be a way to rebuild its strength, currently stuck at the 
traditional 30 percent of the electorate with a formal 
membership of 1.2 million.  Ortiz-Bosch\'s committee is 
discussing a proposal to select party officers by direct vote 
of members, a sharp turn away from the custom of following a 
\"caudillo\" like Mejia or the late Jose Francisco Pena Gomez. 
Another proposal would be to restructure so that PRD local 
committees coincide with electoral precincts. 
 
(SBU) The party expects to lose some and perhaps many of its 
Congressional seats in the 2006 legislative elections.  Its 
comeback strategy will target the next presidential contest 
in 2008.  The longer the PRD takes to reconstruct itself, the 
more likely it is to stay out of power - - the last time the 
electorate voted out a PRD presidential candidate, the party 
remained in opposition for 14 years. 
 
Life without Effective Opposition 
 
(SBU) Meanwhile, the country as a whole suffers from PRD 
division.  Ongoing national crises exert great pressures on 
society and demand a constructive, coherent opposition.  The 
PRD must prove itself capable of negotiating with the 
Fernandez administration and finding consensus on approaches 
to reform, trade, rule of law, and strengthening of 
institutions.  But since losing the election, the PRD has 
been less than the sum of its increasingly self-interested 
members. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Bainbridge Cowell, Michael Meigs. 
 
3. (U) This piece and others in our series can be consulted 
on our classified SIPRNET site 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/  along with 
extensive other material. 
HERTELL 
"
"21880","10/21/2004 11:04","04SANTODOMINGO5779","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","00SANTODOMINGO1712","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 005779 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/15/2009 
TAGS: PINR, EFIN, KJUS, PGOV, DR, (CASTILLO, VINICIO MARINO) 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ATTORNEY VINCHO CASTILLO - STILL KICKING 
AT 73 
 
REF: A. 00 SANTO DOMINGO 01712 
 
     B. 04 SANTO DOMINGO 05426 
 
Classified By: Lisa Kubiske, Deputy Chief of Missions, reasons 1.4 (b) 
and (d). 
 
1. (C)  \"Those who love me, love me a lot.  Those who hate 
me, hate me a lot,\"  declared Marino Vinicio Castillo 
(Vincho) when questioned by a reporter in 2000 about his 
reputation for controversy.  It was a good 
self-characterization then and remains true today.  Vincho, a 
well known attorney who heads a family law firm that is one 
of the oldest in the Dominican Republic, remains in the 
public spotlight at age 73.  He is currently defense counsel 
for Ramon Baez Figueroa (\"Ramoncito\"), one of six accused of 
various fraudulent acts in conjunction with the failure of 
Banco Intercontinental (Baninter) in 2003.  Vincho is not 
keeping quiet on the high profile case.  Whether you 
characterize him as a defender of crooks or a zealous 
advocate for his clients, he remains front and center in 
Dominican legal circles and in politics. 
 
2. (SBU) Vincho Castillo began practicing law in 1954, during 
the Trujillo dictatorship.  He has been a constant on the 
political scene almost since that time.  Over the past 50 
years he has served as the President of the National Council 
on Drugs (1996-2000), run for President on the ticket of a 
political party he founded (the Progressive National Force 
Party) (1986), counseled former President Joaquin Balaguer on 
countering accusations of widespread election fraud (1978), 
successfully prosecuted former President Jorge Blanco on 
corruption charges (1986-87), served in the Dominican 
Congress (1961), and been an on-and-off-again presence in the 
Dominican media as a radio and TV talk show host and guest. 
He prominently supported the 2004 presidential effort of 
Leonel Fernandez, prompting speculation that there was a deal 
cooking that would favor Baez.  Over the past six months it 
seems that Vincho has been in the media almost daily. 
 
3.  (U)  During Castillo\'s stint as President of the drug 
council, a cabinet-level position, he was known for his 
outspoken opposition to narcotrafficking and all associated 
activities.  He was credited with keeping counternarcotics 
efforts near the center of Dominican political debates during 
President Fernandez\'s first term and with helping the USG 
secure implementation of a 1910 bilateral extradition treaty 
that had lain dormant for over 80 years. 
 
4.  (C)  In a meeting in February 2000 with then U.S. 
Ambassador Charles Manatt, Vincho said that off-shore banking 
activities in the Dominican Republic were broader than most 
people realized.  He maintained that there were no longer any 
borders between narcotics trafficking, money laundering and 
terrorism.  In that same conversation, Vincho linked 
discussions of extradition and money laundering by saying, 
\"Extradition of street killers is one thing, but the 
Dominican Republic will really make progress when it 
extradites a corrupt banker.\"  (reftel A). 
 
5.  (C)  His 2000 views seem to us to be right on the mark - 
he is now defending a banker who may have broken not only 
Dominican laws, but U.S. laws.  Ramon Baez\'s involvement in 
the failure of Baninter is well documented, but his case has 
not yet reached the trial stage in the Dominican courts 
(reftel B).  An ongoing investigation in the Southern 
District of Florida may provide the basis for a criminal case 
against Baez there.  If that should occur, there can be 
little doubt that Castillo would provide the most zealous 
defense possible to oppose any attempt by the USG to 
extradite Baez to stand trial in the United States. 
 
6.  (C)  Castillo defended Baez not only in the courtroom but 
also in the court of public opinion.  At every opportunity, 
Vincho claims that Baez is not guilty and that the true 
culprits in the Baninter failure are former Central Bank 
Governor Lois Malkum and former Superintendent of Banks Julio 
Cross.  Vincho made headlines in recent weeks with totally 
unfounded charges that the U.S. and Canadian ambassadors were 
pressuring the courts for conviction of Baez.  Vincho 
blustered that he was thinking of suing both diplomats; 
Supreme Court Chief Justice Jorge Subero Isa told reporters 
that the judiciary was not under pressure and would not heed 
any such efforts to influence it. 
 
7.  (C)  Vincho has said that should the case progress 
against Baez, he will file counter-suits against numerous 
former officials who held office under President Mejia.  Last 
week he called formally on the local office of the 
Organization of American States to assert that the legal team 
will be filing a brief with the InterAmerican Court of Human 
Rights because interrogations have begun without the delivery 
to the defense of the full 40,000 pages of evidence held by 
the investigating magistrate.  Vincho\'s long memory, success 
in prior endeavors, and the potential of files filled with 
political fodder, make his public threats ones that merit the 
attention of a government led by a President who may have 
known during his first term of Baninter\'s penchant for 
questionable dealings. 
 
8.  (C)  During the transition period before President 
Fernandez took office for the second time, Vincho Castillo\'s 
name was rumored by numerous Embassy sources to be in the 
running for Attorney General or Legal Advisor to the 
President.  He was not named to either post.  We have been 
told that Vincho had no desire to take on a government job at 
this time as it would deprive him of the substantial fees he 
is earning from the Baez family. 
 
9.  (SBU)  Although 73, Vincho remains a much-feared player 
on the Dominican legal field.  Two of his sons are following 
in his footsteps.  Pelegrin Castillo Seman is a 
representative in the Dominican Congress and Vinicio Castillo 
Seman is an attorney in the family firm.  Vincho has one 
other son and a daughter. 
 
10.  (C)  Vincho shows no signs of slowing down.  With force 
and craft he continues a ferocious defense of Baez that many 
think will keep that crook safe, sound and out of jail. 
Vincho\'s success, however merited it would be on technical 
grounds, would be a discredit and setback for prospects of 
reinforcing the rule of law in the Dominican Republic. 
 
11.  (U)  Drafted by Angela Kerwin. 
 
12.  (U)  This piece and others can be found at our SIPRNET 
site 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/  along with 
extensive other material. 
HERTELL 
"
"22008","10/25/2004 20:00","04SANTODOMINGO5856","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO5468","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 005856 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/OAS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, KSUM, KCOR, KHIV, ETRD, SCUL, XL, XM, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: OAS AMB. MAISTO ADDRESSES FREE 
TRADE, ANTI-CORRUPTION, EDUCATION, HIV/AIDS, DEMOCRACY 
 
REF: A. SANTO DOMINGO 5468 
 
     B. SANTO DOMINGO 5242 
     C. SANTO DOMINGO 5156 
 
1. (U) U.S. PermRep to the OAS Ambassador John Maisto, 
emphasized goals of the OAS Monterrey and Quebec Summits of 
the Americas in discussions with government, private sector, 
and NGO leaders and the media during his September 16-18 
visit to Santo Domingo.  He was accompanied by Ambassador 
Hertell, DCM Kubiske, USAID Director Brineman, and other 
Embassy staff. 
 
Free Trade 
---------- 
 
2. (SBU) At a dinner with business leaders and a breakfast 
with American Chamber of Commerce members, Ambassador Maisto 
stressed the importance of achieving legislative ratification 
of the regional free trade agreement signed August 5.  In 
this regard he outlined potential negative consequences of an 
anti-trade protectionist tax on fructose beverages which the 
Dominican Republic subsequently enacted (Ref A).  He and the 
Ambassador  stressed that this tax, if not removed, would 
kill chances for U.S. ratification and that the FTA 
negotiations could not be reopened.  Most of the business 
leaders acknowledged this reality but still were looking for 
a way outside of the agreement to satisfy interests of the 
local sugar industry.  The ambassadors also discussed this 
topic in a meeting with President Fernandez and Foreign 
Secretary Carlos Morales Troncoso (reported Ref B). 
 
SIPDIS 
 
Anti-Corruption 
--------------- 
 
3. (U) Ambassador Maisto emphasized anti-corruption in an 
address at the Global Foundation for Democracy and 
Development (www.funglode.org), attended by President 
Fernandez and Foreign Secretary Morales Troncoso and featured 
on national television news broadcasts; at a panel discussion 
at the MFA\'s Diplomatic School with Deputy Foreign Secretary 
Alejandra Liriano, other senior officials, and civil society 
leaders; at the AmCham breakfast; and in an exclusive 
full-page interview in leading circulation national daily 
\"Listin Diario.\"  Maisto noted that an OAS committee of 
experts next March will evaluate the Dominican Republic\'s 
progress in implementing the Inter-American Convention 
against Corruption and thanked the country for its active 
participation in this process.  He stressed the corrosive 
effects of corruption on democratic institutions and on 
business confidence, citing the financial strains provoked by 
major bank fraud that was revealed here last year.  He 
reiterated the Monterrey Summit commitments to deny refuge to 
perpetrators of corruption from any country and bring such 
persons to justice.  The other leading dailies \"El Caribe\" 
and \"Hoy\" ran detailed stories on Maisto\'s anti-corruption 
message. 
 
Education 
--------- 
 
4. (U) At a lunch at Ambassador Hertell\'s residence, with 
Sub-Secretary of Higher Education Victor Hugo de Lancer, 
Secretariat of Education curriculum director Dinorah de Lima, 
 
SIPDIS 
university administrators, and an advisor to the Centers for 
Education in Teacher Training (CETT) Presidential Initiative, 
the guests emphasized teacher training and improved 
educational quality and equity as goals.  They cited 
particular needs such as English instruction at the 
elementary school level and training of math and science 
teachers.  Ambassador Maisto urged them to place their 
educational priorities on the Dominican agenda for the next 
summit of the Americas. 
 
HIV/AIDS 
-------- 
 
5. (SBU) Ambassador Maisto visited the Luis Eduardo Aybar 
Public Hospital, accompanied by Secretary of Health Dr. 
Sabino Baez Reyna, Presidential Commission for AIDS 
(COPRESIDA) executive director Dr. Alberto Fiallo, and 
hospital staff.  He visited the integrated care unit and 
talked with outpatients who are living with AIDS.  The visit 
left Embassy participants with the impression that this was a 
first contact with AIDS realities for many of the senior 
officials who met care providers and patients on the ward. 
 
Democracy 
--------- 
 
6. (U) In the panel discussion at the Diplomatic School and 
in the press interview, Ambassador Maisto referred to the 
requirements for democracy laid out in the Inter-American 
Democratic Charter, going beyond free and fair elections to 
respect for human rights, combating poverty, strengthening 
democratic institutions, and promoting a democratic culture. 
At the dinner, he addressed the broad problems facing the 
countr and how to strengthen democratic institutions. 
Business and AmCham leaders raised issues of rising crime 
(Ref C), social problems, justice system deficiences, and 
civil society development. 
HERTELL 
"
"22010","10/25/2004 20:41","04SANTODOMINGO5858","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 005858 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) AND L/LEI (TAYLOR AND FUENTES); 
JUSTICE FOR MAZUREK, ORJALES, SOKHOL; 
US MARSHALS PLEASE PASS TO C. DUDLEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CJAN, KJUS, PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: NEW DOMINICAN CODE AMENDS EXTRADITION PROCESS 
 
 
1.  Summary.  The Dominican Republic implemented a new 
criminal procedural code on September 27, 2004 which moves 
the Dominican criminal justice system from an inquisitorial 
system towards an accusatory system.  The new code amends the 
procedure for handling extradition cases.  The USG has 
requested the extradition of three fugitives since the 
enactment of the new statute.  Since none of those fugitives 
has been located,  the new code\'s provisions have not yet 
been tested.  Possible procedural scenarios under the new 
code are presented below.  Emboffs will continue to meet with 
Dominican counterparts to discuss the new procedures and 
attempt to determine how they will be applied.   End Summary. 
 
---------- 
Background 
---------- 
 
2.  (U)  The United States and the Dominican Republic entered 
into a bilateral extradition treaty in 1910.  No extraditions 
took place under the treaty until the Dominican Republic 
passed implementing legislation in 1997.  Extraditions to the 
United States began in 1998 and since that time there have 
been more than 80 fugitives returned to various U.S. 
jurisdictions to stand trial or serve sentences. 
 
3.  (U)  On September 27, 2004, a new Dominican criminal 
procedural code went into effect.  The code moves the 
Dominican Republic away from a French based inquisitorial 
system toward an accusatorial or adversarial system similar 
to that used in the United States.  The new criminal 
procedural code changes how extradition cases will be treated 
in the Dominican Republic. 
 
----------- 
Old System 
------------ 
 
4.  (U)  The extradition system in place from 1997 through 
September 2004 placed the burden on the executive branch of 
the GODR to handle most extradition related requests.  The 
process in a successful extradition case was as follows: 
 
A.  The USG delivered a formal diplomatic note with the 
authenticated extradition package to the Foreign Ministry and 
sent a courtesy copy to the Attorney General\'s office. 
 
B.  The Foreign Ministry delivered the information to the 
Attorney General\'s office and authorized the Attorney General 
to proceed. 
 
C.  The Attorney General\'s office evaluated the request and, 
if it was determined to be a valid request, issued a 
provisional arrest warrant for the fugitive who was the 
subject of the request. 
 
D.  The Attorney General\'s office delivered the provisional 
arrest warrant to the National Directorate for Drug Control 
(DNCD). 
 
E.  The DNCD, with guidance and assistance from the U.S. 
Marshals, located the fugitive in the Dominican Republic. 
 
F.  The fugitive was placed in a cell in Najayo prison.  (The 
USG helped finance these cells to hold fugitives subject to 
extradition requests.) 
 
G.  The fugitive was interrogated for the first time by an 
assistant attorney general. 
 
H.  The fugitive was interrogated for the second time by an 
assistant attorney general. 
 
I.  The Attorney General\'s office issued a recommendation to 
extradite the fugitive. 
 
J.  The Attorney General\'s office forwarded its 
recommendation to the Foreign Ministry (note: this step was 
sometimes skipped; if skipped, the recommendation was 
forwarded directly to the Legal Advisor to the President.) 
 
K.  The Foreign Ministry forwarded the Attorney General\'s 
recommendation to the Legal Advisor to the President. 
 
L.  The Legal Advisor to the President reviewed the case and 
the Attorney General\'s recommendation. 
 
M.  The Legal Advisor to the President prepared an 
extradition order for signature by the President. 
 
N.  The President signed the extradition order. 
 
O.  The order was delivered to the DNCD. 
 
P.  The DNCD delivered the fugitive to the U.S. Marshals at 
Las Americas airport and the fugitive was returned to the 
appropriate U.S. jurisdiction. 
 
------------ 
New system 
----------- 
 
5.  (U)  The new system has yet to be tested and there are a 
number of variables that may be interpreted in various 
manners.  Here are possible interpretations of the new system: 
 
 
A.  Steps A thorough I as under the old system (see above). 
 
B.  The Attorney General\'s office forwards its recommendation 
to the Criminal Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice and 
requests a hearing date. 
 
C.  The Criminal Chamber of the Supreme Court sets a hearing 
date. 
 
D.  The Attorney General\'s office, the fugitive plus 
fugitive\'s counsel and a \"representative\" of the petitioning 
country appear and argue the case. 
 
(NOTE: The USG, as the representative of the petitioning 
country, could have a few           possible roles.  We could: 
 
VARIATION # 1 
a.  hire a Dominican Attorney to argue the merits of every 
case, 
 
VARIATION # 2 
b.  send an accredited diplomat to each hearing to certify 
that the documents submitted to the government to request the 
extradition of a fugitive speak for themselves and present no 
further argument, or 
 
VARIATION # 3 
c.  choose not to send a representative to the hearing and 
rely on the Attorney General\'s office to represent the 
interests of the USG. END NOTE.) 
 
E.  The Criminal Chamber of the Supreme Court will decide 
whether to authorize extradition of the fugitive. 
 
F.  If the Criminal Chamber of the Supreme Court decides to 
extradite, it would presumably issue a final judicial order 
and the fugitive would be escorted to the airport by drug 
enforcement officials (DNCD) and turned over to the U.S. 
Marshals for return to the United States. 
 
G.  If the Criminal Chamber of the Supreme Court decides not 
to extradite, presumably the fugitive would be released. 
 
 
6.  (SBU)  In preliminary meetings the Dominican assistant 
attorney general in charge of extraditions told poloff that 
the USG will be required to \"hire a Dominican attorney on a 
contract basis to argue all the details of the case\" 
(Variation # 1 above).  Poloff replied that the burden should 
remain on the Attorney General\'s office to represent the 
interests of the USG as contemplated in the treaty language. 
Poloff also raised the issue of reciprocity and noted that 
the Dominican government was not required to hire an attorney 
to represent its interests in extradition proceedings in the 
United States; the role of advocate for the Dominican 
government in the U.S. is filled by the Department of Justice 
through its assistant U.S. attorneys.  The assistant attorney 
general acknowledged the argument but told poloff,\"We will 
have to wait to see how the Supreme Court interprets the new 
code.\" 
 
------------------------------------ 
Hypotheses under the new system 
------------------------------------ 
 
7.  (SBU)  Embassy Santo Domingo makes the following 
preliminary hypotheses about the extradition process under 
the new criminal procedural code: 
 
-  The extradition treaty contemplates a judicial order for 
extradition.  The new code is in line with the treaty 
conditions.  It is unlikely that an executive order will be 
sufficient to extradite a fugitive whose extradition was 
requested after the implementation of the new criminal 
procedural code (9/27/04). 
 
-  Those fugitives who choose not to challenge their 
respective requests for extradition may waive their hearings 
in front of the Criminal Chamber of the Supreme Court and 
voluntarily return to the United States.  The Criminal 
Chamber of the Supreme Court would still need to sign the 
extradition order. 
 
-  Assuming the fugitive is located, the  extradition process 
should move more quickly from the time a provisional arrest 
warrant is issued until the time of extradition from the 
Dominican Republic.  Built-in time limits in the criminal 
procedural code should expedite the process. 
 
-  The new process will decrease the number of fugitives who 
are returned to the United States over the next year.  After 
that, the legal tests and processes should be concluded and 
the system will be more efficient. 
 
-  The possibility exists that the Attorney General\'s office 
will place the majority of the burden for proving the case on 
the USG representative rather than vigorously arguing for 
extradition of any given fugitive. 
 
8.  (U)  Poloff has faxed the applicable portion of the new 
criminal procedural code to the Department of Justice/Office 
of International Affairs; Department of State WHA/CAR and 
L/LEI.  Emboffs will continue to meet with appropriate 
counterparts to discuss how they believe the new criminal 
procedural code provisions will affect the extradition 
process. 
 
9.  (U)  Drafted by Angela Kerwin. 
 
10.  (U)  This piece and others can be found at our SIPRNET 
site 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/  along with 
extensive other material. 
HERTELL 
"
"22105","10/27/2004 16:47","04SANTODOMINGO5888","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO4403|04SANTODOMINGO4916|04SANTODOMINGO5740|04SANTODOMINGO794","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 005888 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR INR, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, WHA/USOAS; 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON;LABOR FOR ILAB; 
USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD; TREASURY FOR OASIA-LCARTER 
STATE PASS USTR FOR VARGO, RYCKMAN, MALITO, CRONIN 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, DR, VE, CU, CH, TW 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN POLITICS #7: THE VANISHING LEFT 
 
REF: A. A) SANTO DOMINGO 5740 (NOTAL) B) SANTO DOMINGO 
        5605 
     B. C)SANTO DOMINGO 0794 
     C. D) SANTO DOMINGO 4403 
     D. E) SANTO DOMINGO 4916 
 
1. (SBU) This is #7 in our current series on politics in the 
Dominican Republic: 
 
The Vanishing Left 
 
** Despite current economic hardships, Dominicans have shown 
no interest at all in radical political solutions.  This 
year\'s presidential election emphasized the eclipse of the 
left.  With a total of 23 parties fielding candidates, the 
take of the 3 independent parties of the declared radical 
left fell to less than one-third of one percent of the votes. 
 Dominican political habits have been shaped by long habits 
of accomodation to caudillos, patronage disbursed by the 
three non-ideological major parties, and dreams of the United 
States.  President Fernandez\'s Dominican Liberation Party, 
founded along Caribbean marxist lines in the 1970\'s, retains 
little more than a leftist lean in its market-friendly, 
socially conscious party line.** 
 
 
Economic Frustration 
-------------------- 
 
Since mid-2003 Dominicans generally have absorbed the blows 
of rising inflation, peso devaluation, collapsing public 
hospitals, and periodic returns to the age before 
electricity.  Chronic power blackouts this past summer 
sparked public desperation and incidents of tire burning or 
rock throwing in affected neighborhoods, but the unrest in 
the barrios evaporated after the Fernandez inauguration with 
a modest improvement in electricity supply (Ref A).  An 
unexpected rebound of the peso exchange rate since President 
Fernandez\'s inauguration in August has given the middle class 
hope that vacations and education in the United States might 
again become affordable.  Food prices, though high, have 
leveled off and merchants say they will be lowering prices 
soon.  The new government\'s revelations of mismanagement and 
corruption in the previous administration make daily 
headlines, as do the prosecution of executives involved in 
the 2003 commercial bank collapse and concerns over a 
perceived \"crime wave\" (Ref B). 
 
Exit, Hope, and a Jaundiced Eye 
------------------------------- 
 
Yet no radical voices, have recently challenged the economic 
or political systems here, apart from a ridiculous daily 
half-hour radio broadcast of 1950s-style propaganda by a tiny 
communist faction.  Some attribute this passivity to the 
safety valve of illegal emigration via the perilous passage 
to Puerto Rico.  Others cite selective memories of \"good 
times\" of Fernandez\'s first administration and hopes that he 
can resuscitate the economy.  And there is visceral 
skepticism toward all politicians and their promises, rooted 
in a chaotic history. 
 
Sporadic Protests Subside 
------------------------- 
 
The continuing socio-economic pressures would appear to offer 
openings for new political forces, as would the impending 
disintegration the of the PRSC, one of the three traditional 
parties.  Potential maverick leaders exist, but they are on 
the margins of the political arena.  Twice during the runup 
to the election, a loose coalition of community activists 
successfully called for national work stoppages to protest 
against economic conditions (Ref C).  Dominican workers 
stayed home for the enforced holidays, regardless of the 
organizers\' poorly articulated demands.  This year doctors in 
public hospitals have engaged in almost continuous strikes 
and work stoppages, protesting their low pay and abysmal 
resources to treat patients (Ref D).  With a brief respite 
after Fernandez\'s inauguration, they resumed their agitation. 
 The public sympathizes, but knows the government is broke. 
 
 
Small Parties - A Slippery Slope 
-------------------------------- 
 
Although small parties abound in the Dominican Republic, none 
has gained prominence in decades.  A few have ambitious, 
serious leaders who are trying to launch moderate political 
projects, such as Trajano Santana of the Independent 
Revolutionary Party (PRI), an offshoot of the mainline PRD 
which ran Santana as an independent candidate this year 
(drawing only 3,994 votes, 0.1% of the total).  Such a 
leader, with skill, luck, and private sector funding, could 
conceivably gain attentionand build a party to fill the 
partial vacuum created by the inert left and the PRSC 
meltdown. 
 
Independent leftist parties sank to a new low of voter 
support in the May 16 presidential election.  Their three 
candidates together drew 10,700 votes, 0.3% of the 3,613,700 
votes cast.  The vote for socialist or communist parties 
continued a long-term decline since 1982, when parties of the 
left tallied 26,731 votes -- 1.5% of the vote.  Since then, 
in national elections, the left\'s share has remained below 
1%.  Force of the Revolution (FR), which in 1996 aborbed the 
old Dominican Communist Party, and the other two small left 
parties that ran candidates this year failed to attain the 
minimum votes required for continued recognition and public 
funding by the Central Election Board. 
 
The vanishing parties did not lack visible candidates.  FR 
ran Rafael Flores Estrella, a former PRD presidential 
pre-candidate, instead of craggy veteran communist leader 
Narciso Isa Conde.  The New Alternative Party (PNA) for the 
second time put forward party boss Ramon Almanzar, a former 
activist in the \"Collective of Popular Organizations,\" 
organizers of street demonstrations and work stoppages 
against the GODR.  TV talk-show personality Raul Perez Pena 
(\"Bacho\") ran again under his Authentic Democracy Party (PAD) 
banner.  Although the most widely known of the three, Bacho 
received a mere 1,838 votes (and the National Electoral Board 
misspelled his name on the ballots). 
 
Patronage, Not Revolution 
------------------------- 
 
The left\'s failure to resonate with Dominicans has historical 
precedents.  Groups such as the 14th of June Movement opposed 
the Trujillo dictatorship, sometimes violently, but were 
fighting tyranny and had little exposure to leftist ideas. 
Many of the young guerrillas came from the social and 
economic elite.  Some who continued to commit violence into 
the early 1970s were influenced by Fidel Castro\'s Cuban 
revolution -- this included military officers who began the 
1965 civil war.  But elected President Joaquin Balaguer tamed 
nearly all of them by handing out positions in government or 
at the Autonomous University of Santo Domingo.  Traditional 
Dominican voters -- rural and poor -- sought to get by with a 
paternalistic leader like Balaguer who promised them public 
jobs, social programs, or personal favors.  Today\'s urban or 
small-town Dominicans, when pressed by economic woes, tend to 
fall back on this patron-client behavior (after all, Balaguer 
left office only 8 years ago).  They may occasionally yield 
to mob impulses, but they do not dream of overturning the 
system. 
 
Sellout to Centrists 
-------------------- 
 
To get ahead, most small-party leaders suppress their 
ideological preferences and ally with a mainline centrist 
party -- PLD, PRD, or PRSC.  Exploiting a major candidate\'s 
name recognition, a left-wing group can reap more votes, but 
to the benefit of the mainline partner.  The Dominican 
Workers Party (PTD), allied with the PLD this year, got 
24,714 votes (0.7% of the total), compared with only 6,138 in 
2000 when its leader Jose Gonzalez Espinosa ran independently 
with support from the Communist Workers Party and another 
small left group.  Gonzalez Espinosa and his PTD and five 
other parties that backed President Fernandez are getting 
minor jobs in his administration, with little hope of 
influencing policy.  (As the new executive director of the 
Fund for Promotion of Community Initiatives, Gonzalez 
Espinosa found nearly all his agency\'s projects paralyzed for 
lack of funds.)  The six parties helped ensure Fernandez a 
first-round victory, pushing his vote percentage from 49 to 
57. 
 
Leftist at Home or Abroad? 
--------------------------- 
 
President Fernandez\'s Dominican Liberation Party, founded 
along Caribbean marxist lines in the 1970\'s, retains little 
more than a leftist lean in its market-friendly, socially 
conscious party line.  A few of our conservative contacts, 
recalling President Fernandez\'s reestablishment of diplomatic 
relations with Cuba in 1998, have imagined he will reach out 
to leftist or populist governments abroad, for example those 
in Cuba, Venezuela, or China.  In our view, any such gestures 
would have minimum ideological significance and would be 
intended to make Dominican foreign relations appear more 
diverse, as well as to satisfy a residue of left-leaning PLD 
founders from the 1970s.  But there would be no sea change. 
 
Although Cuba and the Dominican Republic have diplomatic 
relations, the limited exchanges with Cuba -- of medical 
students, athletes, or artists -- take place through NGOs, 
universities or multilateral organizations, not bilaterally 
between the governments.  Two-way trade is miniscule. 
 
As for Venezuela, Santo Domingo needs and seeks good 
relations with Caracas to ensure oil deliveries from its main 
supplier, and to this end Fernandez has drawn on his existing 
friendship with President Chavez in ongoing negotiations (Ref 
E). Slippery operator Miguel Mejia, rumored to have 
connections to many renegade regimes, is a visible godfather 
to this deal and serves Fernandez as a Minister without 
Portfolio.  Fernandez is likely to travel soon to Caracas to 
sign a deal in which Venezuela provides soft financing for 25 
percent of the oil bill.  But Fernandez\'s background and 
world view are very different from those of Hugo Chavez, 
particularly as regards the United States. 
 
A political rapprochement with China seems unlikely, as it 
could jeopardize Santo Domingo\'s close relations with Taiwan 
and the substantial assistance from Taipei.  There was a 
brief stir last May during the visit of Dominican congressmen 
to Taipei, when a Taiwanese legislator told the press that 
Senator Ramon Albuquerque (of Mejia\'s PRD) had commented that 
Fernandez might recognize the mainland.  Albuquerque claimed 
he had been misquoted. 
 
Fernandez\'s foreign policy, like that of Mejia, so far 
centers on relations with the United States, with some added 
attention to Europe and the Caribbean region as a whole. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Bainbridge Cowell. 
 
3. (U) This piece and others in our series can be consulted 
on our classified SIPRNET site 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/  along with 
extensive other material. 
HERTELL 
"
"22151","10/28/2004 19:16","04SANTODOMINGO5952","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04SANTODOMINGO5779","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 05 SANTO DOMINGO 005952 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, WHA/OAS; EB, EB/IFD/OMA, 
EB/TPP/BTA; 
WHITE HOUSE FOR USTR; NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB; USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD;TREASURY FOR 
OASIA-LCARTER 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/04/2014 
TAGS: ETRD, PGOV, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN PRESIDENT ON CORRUPTION, FREE TRADE 
AGREEMENT, REGIONAL POLITICS, FINANCES 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 5779 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Hans H Hertell.  Reason:  1.4 (a) and (d). 
 
1.  (C) Summary.  Dominican President Fernandez asked on 
October 21 for USG help in addressing corruption issues.  He 
told the Ambassador that he remains strongly in favor of the 
free trade agreement (FTA).  He gave the sugar sector an 
opportunity of \"only three weeks\" (until sometime the week of 
October 25)  to use his letter to President Bush to seek 
review of their complaints. A day later Foreign Minister 
Morales Tronocos said Fernandez would choose one of several 
domestic approaches to persuade sugar interests to drop their 
opposition to the FTA. Fernandez is seeking support for 
former president of El Salvador Francisco Flores for the post 
of OAS Secretary General. Dominicans were about to sign a 
deal in which Venezuela will provide long-term financing for 
25 percent of the value of petroleum purchases.  Fernandez 
sought USG help to design action plans to fight corruption 
and illegal narcotics.   End summary. 
 
Anti-Corruption: the Original Purpose of the Meeting 
 
2.  (C) During a lengthy meeting with the Ambassador and 
senior staff on October 21 Dominican President Fernandez 
touched on free trade, security issues, and the effort to 
choose a new OAS Secretary General.  He had convened the 
meeting to address the general problem of corruption. The 
President discussed at length his analysis of the culture of 
corruption in the Dominican Republic, including contributing 
factors, and asked for USAID help in reinforcing 
administrative systems, putting together a public outreach 
effort, and putting together an action plan to address the 
problem.  He asked USAID Director Elena Brineman to work 
closely with presidental chief of staff Danilo Medina, since 
Medina coordinates cabinet efforts on institutional reform. 
 
3. (C) When the Ambassador raised the issue of the well-known 
military practice of skimming 10 percent or more on 
contracts, Fernandez replied: \"That goes beyond my ability to 
intervene.  If a Latin American president interferes 
seriously with those types of military matters, he risks 
getting shot.\"  Fernandez said that his decree retiring 99 
generals within the first month of the administration had 
already caused him difficulties.  His intelligence services 
had told him of threats of assassination.  He said he 
believes that the recent violence may be due in part by 
agitation by forces hostile to him. 
 
Crime 
 
4.  (C) Fernandez spoke of his concern about the spread of 
narcotics and associated violence, attributed to flows from 
Colombia and Haiti.  The border area had become a \"no man\'s 
land, like Eritrea or Bangladesh, or another galaxy entirely. 
 Seizures had not increased even though trafficking had. 
Worst affected by associated violence were the very poorest 
Dominicans.  Fernandez suggested that he might ask attorney 
\"Vincho\" Castillo to take a newly created post as Advisor for 
Anti-Narcotics and Anti-Gangs. 
 
5.  (C) The Ambassador expressed strong misgivings about 
Castillo (see reftel), recalling repeated recent accusations 
from \"Vincho\" that the Ambassador and U.S. government had 
been improperly intervening in the prosecution of Ramon Baez, 
charged of massive fraud in the 2003 Baninter failure. U.S. 
agencies would have to discuss the matter; his initial 
response was that for such an important post the USG would 
need a person not only knowledgeable but also willing to work 
with the Embassy.  The President did not insist on Castillo 
and asked for suggestions of names of candidates with whom 
the Embassy could work. 
 
6.  (C) In this connection Fernandez recalled the case of 
Guido Gomez Mazara, legal advisor to Hipolito Mejia.  The 
administration is watching Gomez closely, he said, and 
Fernandez knows that the Embassy\'s refusal to work with him 
was justified.  Gomez is provocative and immature, he 
commented, and he does have links with the underworld. 
 
Brooke/620Q Arrears and USG sanctions 
 
7.  (C) The Ambassador advised the President that as of 
October 15 the Dominican Republic is more than one year in 
arrears on certain bilateral debt payments, a situation which 
under U.S. law is the basis for suspension of most bilateral 
assistance programs.  The Embassy notified Technical 
Secretary Temistocles Montas of this in writing on October 
 
SIPDIS 
18, providing a detail of unpaid payments triggering arrears. 
 The cumulative amount through the end of 2004 will be 
approximately USD 23 million.  Fernandez was dismayed and 
said he would consult with the Technical Secretary. 
 
\"I\'ll Go 100 Percent to Keep DR in CAFTA\" 
 
8.  (C) When the Ambassador raised with Fernandez the lack of 
congressional response to the President\'s request to repeal 
the 25 percent protectionist tax on fructose-sweetened 
drinks, Fernandez reaffirmed his intention to overcome sugar 
sector opposition. 
 
9. (C) The Ambassador began by describing to the President 
Washington\'s great concern that the 25 percent tax had not 
yet been repealed. All knew this tax was a tactic used by the 
Dominican sugar interests to preserve their privileged 
position in the economy, dating back 450 years.  The 
Ambassador warned the president that it was a losers\' 
initiative -- akin to a protectionist measure barring 
computers as a means of protecting, say, typewriters.  Worse, 
the uncertainty about Dominican intentions caused 
postponement of a CAFTA-DR ministerial meeting on the 
environment and now meant that the country is not included in 
other activities designed to prepare for CAFTA coordination 
and implementation, such as some trade capacity building 
programs.  The challenge to Fernandez was how to turn this 
situation around and show leadership.  When, he asked, was 
the last time before August that the Dominican Republic had 
signed an agreement at the White House? 
 
10. (C) Fernandez replied emphatically, in English, \"You 
don\'t have to convince me.  You are preaching to the 
converted.\" He acknowledged making a mistake of inattention 
in sending the repeal proposal to the Senate, where the tax 
package had just been approved despite sharp debate over the 
25 percent tax.  (Senate President Andres) \"Bautista does not 
control the Senate on this issue. (Sugar concern) Central 
Romana has it blocked.  They and their Washington lawyers are 
telling senators that Congress has until March to 
reconsider.\" 
 
11.  (C) The Ambassador strongly dismissed that 
interpretation.  Fernandez continued, \"I gave them three 
weeks -- told them that I would not back them, but I would 
sign their letter, so they could try one last effort to have 
their case heard, but that three weeks runs out next week.\" 
He outlined the sector representatives\' argument that they\'d 
been excluded in the last hours of negotiations, despite 
earlier assurances that sugar would not be included in the 
agreement.  \"The U.S. should have the flexibility at least to 
listen to them -- not to make any promises, but at least to 
listen.\"  He warned that sugar interests were moneyed and 
powerful -- employing \"the man with the suitcase\" (bribery) 
to influence congressmen. 
 
12. (C)  The Ambassador stressed that the U.S. interest is 
exactly the same as Fernandez\'s and the same as that of the 
Dominican Republic. Fernandez replied, \"I know that.  My 
position has not changed.  I said it in Santiago -- I will 
not allow the interests of the country as a whole to be held 
hostage to a single sector.  But this is a democracy, and I 
am president of the whole country.  I cannot simply exclude 
the sugar interests.  All I am asking is for them to be given 
an opportunity to present their case.  That would not 
endanger the agreement.  They are saying that a technical 
error was made.  I will reactivate our efforts next week. 
There is no ambiguity or ambivalence in my view. I will 
defend the free trade agreement and serve as a channel of 
communication.  That is what a president should do.\" 
 
13.  (C) The DCM commented that the Embassy had heard the 
sugar sector\'s arguments, which held nothing new; USTR\'s 
account of the talks differed from their allegations. The 
Ambassador stressed that the sides had spent more than 18 
months mutually clarifying views.  \"Listening is important,\" 
replied the President.  \"If one doesn\'t listen, the people 
will go into the streets.\" 
 
14.  (C) The Ambassador challenged him:  \"How far would you 
be willing to go to save this agreement?\"  Fernandez replied, 
\"One hundred percent.  This is the top priority for the 
country and for the government.  Sara Lee Corporation called 
on me -- they told me they were holding up an investment of 
USD 80 million because of the uncertainty about the 
agreement.  And how can we obtain technology transfers 
without an agreement?  If you know, tell me!\" He said that 
lawyers for Central Romana were saying that USTR Zoellick 
would be leaving in January and was no longer part of the 
equation. 
 
15. (C) \"The best for your country,\" said the Ambassador, 
\"would be to seize the moment and ratify now.  Get ahead of 
the Central Americans.\"  Fernandez replied that in a 
democracy, a leader cannot do just what he likes; he first 
must lead public opinion. 
 
OAS Secretary General 
 
16.  (C) Reviewing the search underway for a new OAS 
secretary general, President Fernandez said that he had told 
 
SIPDIS 
Francisco Flores of El Salvador to visit the CARICOM 
countries for support.  Fernandez had already spoken to 
several CARICOM heads of state or government on his behalf. 
CARICOM wil meet in November.  Venezuela was violently 
anti-Flores, he commented, because Flores had recognized 
Carmona in the short-lived overthrow of the Chavez 
government.  Venezuela was pressing the CARICOM states, but 
the Venezuelans had not approached the Dominicans on the 
subject. 
 
17.  (C) Brazilian ex-president Cardoso might be a candidate, 
said Fernandez, although Brazil had recently held the 
Secretary General position; and perhaps \"Lula\" might like to 
 
SIPDIS 
have Cardoso out of the country.  Fernandez\'s second choice, 
after Flores, would be Insulza of Chile, who was prestigious, 
a known academic, and former foreign minister.  Fernandez 
considers that Central America, as a block, will not support 
Flores because of border differences with Honduras. 
 
18.  (C) As for Flores, Fernandez knows him well, considers 
him a good candidate, serious and intelligent. 
 
IMF and IFIs 
 
19.  (C) Fernandez expects to sign a letter of intention with 
the IMF in November.  \"Then,\" he said, \"It will be like 
dominos, each one falling into place -- the IMF, the Paris 
Club, and the rescheduling of the sovereign bonds.\" 
Bondholders have already formed a committee, with the 
assistance of Morgan Stanley.  Venezuela will provide 
long-term financing for 25 percent of petroleum sales, an 
arrangement that will help meet the problems in the 
electricity sector. 
 
20.  (C) As for electricity, he said, contracts wth 
generators must be reviewed and revised.  He spoke with some 
annoyance about the continuing obligation to pay COGENTRIX 
some \"USD 5 million a month\" whether or not it was 
generating.  He has asked for contractors to do a study of 
the prices of electricity generation across Latin America; he 
says that due to bad contracts, the Dominican Republic faces 
higher rates than anywhere else in the hemisphere.  He is 
well aware that the COGENTRIX financing package is structured 
so that default by the government would trigger up to USD 400 
million in sovereign loan guarantees. 
 
21.  (C) USAID Director Brineman mentioned the plan for the 
electricity sector currently in development, shortly to go to 
Fernandez.  \"We need to find USD 20 million a month, just to 
survive,\" the President commented.  \"Tariff rates cannot go 
up; that would just encourage more theft and evasion. 
Generators say, \'raise the tariffs\' -- we need to restructure 
the grid.\"  Fernandez finds that the eastern region (EDESTE) 
has excess capacity, while the north (EDENORTE) is 
underserved by \"monopoly\" Smith and Enron near Puerto Plata, 
which \"charges for 180 megawatts, even though they don\'t 
produce more than 135 megawatts.\"  Fernandez said he is very 
interested in getting a brief on the USAID plan -- \"because 
USAID is the most independent advisor we have.\" 
 
22.  (C) The cooking gas supply situation is acceptable, 
Fernandez said.  Subsidies have been reduced by 3 percent so 
far by eliminating subsidies on deliveries to industry.  The 
cut should be 25 percent, said Fernandez, as we work our way 
through the chain and target them correctly.  The project to 
issue cards to qualified household consumers is moving and 
wide distribution should be underway by December, with the 
prospect of finishing it by March. 
 
23.  (C) Fernandez said that further possibilities to help 
restructure the electricity sector could include the two new 
coal-fired generating plants available in Houston.  Mergers 
of distribution companies might be a possibility, and there 
are three pilot projects now for wind-powered generation. 
 
COMMENT 
24.  (C) Fernandez was solo as he met the Ambassador, DCM, 
USAID Director and EcoPol counselor.  At one point he stepped 
out of the room to get a pad with which to make notes.  As 
always, he was thoughtful, well spoken, and conceptual in his 
aproach.  He left some stark uncertainties, however -- not 
specifying, for example, just what he intends to do to 
promote the free trade agreement once the apparently 
arbitrary three-week delay for sugar action is finished.  He 
described the sugar sector\'s ability to block but did not 
suggest how this could be overcome.  (The next day in 
conversation with the Ambassador, Foreign Minister Carlos 
Morales Troncoso, himself an ally of the sector, suggested 
that there were \"three approaches, all domestic\" that might 
persuade sugar interests to drop their opposition to 
repealing the protectionist tax.  Morales declined the 
Ambassador\'s invitation to be more specific.) 
HERTELL 
"
"22216","10/29/2004 19:03","04SANTODOMINGO5972","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 005972 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/OMA; 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB; USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD;TREASURY FOR 
OASIA-LCARTER 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/04/2014 
TAGS: PGOV, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN TECHNICAL SECRETARY OUTLINES PROGRESS 
WITH IMF, VENEZUELAN OIL TALKS AND FISCAL PLANS 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske.  Reason:  1.4 (a) and (d). 
 
1. (SBU) Dominican Technical Secretary of the Dominican 
presidency Temistocles Montas received the Ambassador and 
senior staff last night, October 28 to discuss a variety of 
topics, including the progress in discussions on a new IMF 
program, the Paris Club, the country,s new oil finance deal 
with Venezuela, the free trade agreement (CAFTA) and other 
topics. 
 
Moving Forward with the IMF 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
2. (C) Montas told the Ambassador that the economic team has 
\"almost finished\" defining the elements of a letter of 
intention with the IMF for a renewed standby.  The Dominicans 
are expecting Fund staff to provide them with clean working 
versions in Spanish and English next week (November 1-5), 
which Montas will give to the Embassy for transmission to the 
USG.  After that, on November 8, a Dominican team will travel 
to Washington to finish the work.  Montas said that they 
might call on the Department of State at that time. 
 
3. (C) The Fund is requiring unspecified tough previous 
measures, several of which the administration will announce 
next week.  The administration acknowledges that the 
Dominican Republic has a credibility problem with the Fund 
and it must furnish to Fund directors proof of a new 
seriousness.  Fernandez is well aware of this and intends to 
deliver in full on undertakings to the Fund.  Montas 
reiterated his understanding that this year would be a &year 
of sacrifice8 for the Dominican Republic. 
 
4. (C) Some of the new measures will require congressional 
action.  Others require realizing significant savings on 
programs of domestic spending. 
 
5. (C) He said that President Fernandez and his team had 
spent \"all day\" Saturday, October 23 with the Fund, World 
Bank, and Inter-american Development Bank.  (This session was 
an initiative of IDB senior staff , who believed that the 
institutions, message would be conveyed most effectively if 
they met with Fernandez as a group. IDB president Enrique 
Iglesias was the senior institutional represenative.) 
 
6. (C) The Saturday seminar with the international financial 
institutions had been helpful, Montas said.  The fundamental 
issues were familiar to all.  Montas said that the Fund had 
expressed general satisfaction with the progress made to 
date.  Presentations by the World Bank and by USAID-financed 
consultants on the electricity sector had impressed upon 
everyone that actions to sustain electricity supply will be 
crucial to any program.  Montas said that the strategic 
approach to the sector should be ready for implementation by 
mid-November. 
 
7. (C) After the Saturday meeting and a further lengthy 
session with the consultants on Sunday, Fernandez  accepted 
the necessity of electricity tariff rate increases.  Rates 
will go up in January, along with a restructuring and 
retargeting of subsidies.  Montas cited the consultants, 
recommendations and bottom-line figures: stabilization of the 
sector by the end of 2005 can probably be achieved with 
vigorous adjustments and additional expenditures of USD 260 
million, while without adjustment the sector would require 
more than USD 800 million. 
 
8. (C) The administration had also come to an accommodation 
with Dominican private banks to allow them to start making 
further provisions against dubious loans after January 1, an 
approach that will allow them to post profits for calendar 
year 2004.  Montas emphasized that the banks would still have 
to improve capital ratios but they now have a period of 3 
years during which to get to the 10 percent required to meet 
international norms.  This is a change in the target 
implementation date for  banking reforms required by the 
Fund.  He implied that the Fund had agreed to this change in 
the calendar. 
9. (C) Economic Council president Julio Ortega is now in New 
York, consulting with private banks to obtain a financing 
package of about USD 150 million from Citigroup and others as 
a contribution toward an identified USD 300m financing gap. 
 
Venezuela Will Offer Soft Terms on Petroleum 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- 
 
10. (C) Montas and presidential chief of staff Danilo Medina 
were closely involved in negotiating the petroleum deal to be 
signed with Venezuela in mid-November.  They had sought 
extensive concessions but the Venezuelans determined that 
their OPEC obligations limited the possible scope. In 
addition, the Venezuelans  wanted to avoid giving their 
domestic opposition grounds for criticism of the Chavez 
administration. 
 
11. (C) During the visit last week to Santo Domingo of the 
Venezuelan petroleum minister, the sides agreed to modify an 
agreement negotiated by the Mejia administration but never 
sent to congress for ratification.   That accord envisioned 
long-term financing for 25 percent of Dominican imports of 
20,000 bb/day.  The revision just negotiated will provide 
financing for 25 percent of Dominican imports of 53,000 
bb/day, at 2 percent per annum with a 15-year grace period. 
The arrangement is for one year with possibility of renewal. 
  This is by no means all of Dominican oil consumption, which 
runs 150,000 bb/day, but it will nevertheless provide payment 
relief of between USD 200 million and USD 260 million per 
year.  (Montas noted that the Dominicans had sought to get 
the Venezuelans to apply these terms to  70,000 bb/day.) 
Some of the funds made available will be applied to the 
Central Bank,s quasi-fiscal deficit and some will go toward 
payments in the electricity sector.  The IMF was consulted on 
the arrangement. 
 
12. (C) Montas said Venezuela had not requested any specific 
concession for this arrangement; he noted that it allows 
Venezuela to recoup some of the market share lost during the 
Mejia administration.  Shipping charges for Venezuela 
purchases are lower than those for Mexican or Colombian 
petroleum.  He noted that since the Dominican Republic 
purchases a significant mix of &white products8 (refined 
petroleum), the cost is sharply higher than posted 
international prices for crude.  The government of Panama has 
asked for a copy of the text, in hopes of reaching a similar 
arrangement with Venezuela. 
 
Government Procurement, Transparency and Sacrifice 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - 
 
13. (C) After hearing the energy experts, analysis, 
President Fernandez has dropped the notion of importing 
coal-fired generating plants from Texas.  These are expensive 
and would take time to install, Montas said, but the 
fundamental objection is that they would provide generating 
capacity disproportionate to the system.  To be economically 
viable, the Dominican peak demand would have to be closer to 
4000 megawatts than the current 1700 megawatts.  The 
installations would require an extensive system of new high 
tension lines built to higher standards than those now in the 
grid.  Montas commented that in the course of the discussion 
last weekend, participants strongly advocated measures to 
increase competition on the basis of lowest-cost generation. 
The Madrid Accord to lower rates paid by the state in return 
for one-time payments was a non-competitive fix and probably 
not viable. 
 
14. (C) As for the much-discussed proposal that Brazilian 
interests build an urban tramline or underground subway, 
Montas dismissed it outright, at least in the medium term. 
\"We cannot be seeking out new financing,\" he said, \"when 
already there is as much as USD 1.8 billion in international 
lending on hold pending completion of the IMF agreement.  We 
can authorize some studies and preparation for such a 
project, but the administration will be tightening its belt 
in the first year and making sacrifices.  Maybe in a second 
year we could start to think about it.\" 
 
15. (C) The administration intends to use the IMF 
negotiations to help impose greater transparency on 
government contracting and financing, Montas said.  Public 
works are of particular concern.  The first Fernandez 
administration presented congress a law along these lines but 
at that time Congress \"was not interested.\" 
 
Clearing Arrears, Paris Club 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
16. (C) On Dominican arrears on bilateral official debt, 
Montas noted that the administration recently paid more than 
USD 2 million on U.S. accounts.  The IMF agreement and Paris 
Club agreement require clearing all bilateral official 
arrears, and Finance Minister Bengoa has assured him there 
will be sufficient funds available to do this by the end of 
the calendar year.  The administration intends to make the 
payments.  The DCM noted the principle that there should be 
no preferences in scheduling payments due to Paris Club 
creditors. 
 
17. (C) In the Paris Club process, the Dominican 
administration must submit each bilateral rescheduling 
agreement to Congress upon signature; the agreement enters 
into force once approved by Congress.  Montas foresees no 
delays in obtaining congressional approval after signature. 
Embassy officers explained that for the USG the agreement 
does not enter into force until 30 days after notification of 
the U.S. Congress. 
 
Free Trade Agreement and the Tax on Fructose 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
18. (C) The Ambassador outlined to Montas the need for the 
administration to obtain quick repeal of the protectionist 
tax on fructose-sweetened drinks.  Montas assured him that 
Fernandez is \"totally committed\" to the free trade agreement 
(FTA).  The Ambassador urged Montas to advocate Dominican 
leadership in obtaining early ratification by the Dominican 
congress and conveyed to Montas a comment by IDB president 
Iglesias -- that the Dominican Republic would be \"non-viable\" 
without the FTA.  (Montas agreed.) The Ambassador asked 
Montas not only to encourage a vote as soon as possible to 
repeal the tax, but also to pay attention to the presentation 
and handling of the matter.  It would not help repeal the tax 
while affirming the intention to take the USG through dispute 
procedures in the WTO. .  The Ambassador warned that the 
Dominican Republic has lost credibility with other trading 
partners and was already losing access to mechanisms for 
coordination and assistance. 
19. (C) Montas commented that the matter should get resolved 
in the next couple of weeks.  Congres is currently scheduled 
to meet through November 26, he noted, but the session may 
run  longer, since it will have to consider the 2005 budget. 
 
Response for Treasury Under Secretary Taylor 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- 
 
20. (C) Montas said that in response to a telephone call from 
Treasury Under Secretary John Taylor the previous day, the 
Dominicans would be providing the Embassy with copies in 
Spanish and English of the draft letter of intention.  Texts 
available in Santo Domingo are tentative and incomplete, and 
in some places translations are inaccurate.  He prefers to 
give the USG the most recent and most accurate material, 
which will be coming next week from the IMF. 
 
21. (C) Montas said that he had asked Taylor for help in 
getting technical assistance on customs and tax collections, 
and that the Under Secretary had expressed willingness to 
organize this.  Montas mentioned that his October 8 visit to 
Taylor at Treasury had been undertaken on very short notice, 
with a Saturday departure to make a Monday appointment; he 
had not been able to coordinate with the Embassy or even with 
all of the Dominican team. 
 
November 15 Availability 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
22.(SBU) Montas expects to be back in Santo Domingo by 
November 15 and he indicated that President Fernandez will 
probably be here as well at that time. 
 
Coordination 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
23. (SBU) Montas will provide the Embassy with a list of the 
experts in his team to improve coordination.  He offered to 
help arrange meetings with the President whenever this might 
be needed, and he is ready to convey to Fernandez any 
sensitive or confidential messages from the Ambassador.  The 
Ambassador noted that in similar fashion the Embassy could 
help smooth the way for Dominican officials in Washington. 
HERTELL 
"
"22253","11/1/2004 12:13","04SANTODOMINGO5982","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE223568","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005982 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR IO/UNP, WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, KCIP, IO, PM, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC AGREES TO CO-SPONSOR UNGA 
RESOLUTION ON INTERNATIONAL LAW ENFORCEMENT ASSISTANCE 
NETWORK FOR COMBATING THE CRIMINAL MISUSE OF INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGIES 
 
REF: STATE 223568 
 
1.  Embassy delivered reftel demarche to the MFA on October 
19.  On October 29, Deputy IO Ddirector Rhadys Abreu de 
Polanco called to say that Foreign Minister Carlos Morales 
Troncoso had approved the Dominican Republic\'s co-sponsoring 
the proposed U.S. draft UNGA resolution on the international 
law enforcement assistance network for combating the criminal 
misuse of information technology.  Polanco said she would 
immediately send instructions to the Dominican mission to the 
UN in New York. 
KUBISKE 
"
"22262","11/1/2004 13:21","04SANTODOMINGO5985","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE233266","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005985 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR, EB/IFD/OMA - FORSYTH; PARIS FOR TREASURY 
ATTACHE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, KTIA, EFIN 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: IMPLEMENTATION OF 2004 PARIS 
CLUB AGREEMENT 
 
REF: SECSTATE 233266 
 
1.  The Ambassador delivered the draft text of the Paris Club 
rescheduling agreement, in English only, to Technical 
Secretary for the Dominican Presidency Temistocles Montas on 
 
SIPDIS 
October 28.  Emboffs asked that Montas and his staff examine 
it and indicate whether any changes would be requested. 
 
2. Montas informed Ambassador that under Dominican law the 
agreement will become effective after signature but only once 
the Dominican congress has formally approved the text. 
Montas does not foresee any significant delay between 
eventual signature and approval.  Emboffs explained to him 
the timeline under U.S. law for entry into force. 
KUBISKE 
"
"22421","11/3/2004 13:05","04SANTODOMINGO6028","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006028 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR G, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC; DEPT PASS USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, ECON, EFIN, KHIV 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN AIDS OFFICE TELLS GLOBAL FUND IT WILL 
MEET JAN 31 DEADLINE FOR MANAGEMENT IMPROVEMENTS 
 
 
1.  Summary.   Appointees of the new Dominican administration 
told visiting representatives from the Global Fund for AIDS, 
TB and Malaria (GFATM) that they will quickly improve 
management to qualify for the first tranche of the USD 47m 
grant.  GFATM gave the administration until January 31.  The 
grant has been pending for 20 months.  End summary. 
 
2.  Representatives from the Global Fund for AIDS, TB, and 
Malaria (GFATM), Dr. Arletty Pinel and Ricard Lacort visited 
Santo Domingo the week of October 18-22.  They called on a 
broad array of stakeholders, including NGOs, donors 
(including USAID), the Ministry of Health AIDS and Sexually 
Transmitted Infections Directorate, the Dominican private 
sector, and the Country Coordinating Mechanism (CCM) of the 
GFATM. 
 
3.  Pinel and Lacort told USAID at the outset of their visit 
of deep concern that the Presidential AIDS Council 
(COPRESIDA), named Principal Beneficiary of the USD 47 
million GFATM agreement, had not taken appropriate and timely 
steps to qualify for the first tranche of the grant agreed 20 
months earlier.  A preaward audit conducted by Price 
Waterhouse Coopers had identified a number of managerial 
weaknesses in the four principal management areas: finance, 
procurement, program, and monitoring and evaluation. 
 
4. Dominican President Leonel Fernandez, inaugurated in 
mid-August, appointed Dr. Alberto Fiallo as Executive 
Director of COPRESIDA.  Fiallo gave a presentation on 
Wednesday evening, pointing out the deficiencies in Copresida 
management capacity that he inherited and giving his 
recommendations for correcting them.  USAID considers that 
his assessment is on target. 
 
4.  At a Friday meeting with the Country Coordinating 
Mechanism Dr Fiallo reprised his presentation.   Global Fund 
representative Ricard Lacort responded with a matrix of the 
actions that Copresida and the CCM would have to complete by 
January 31, 2005, in order to remain eligible for Global Fund 
resources.  Lacort said that in the nearly two years since 
the award was approved, Copresida has made slow and unsteady 
progress in fulfilling the conditions of the preaward survey. 
 If Copresida and the Dominican Republic could not show 
concrete progress by January 31 they would  risk having the 
award cancelled. 
 
Comment 
 
5.  As a member of the CCM, USAID  has been witness to the 
poor quality of previous COPRESIDA management.  Embassy 
agrees with much of Dr. Fiallo,s assessment of Copresida, 
including particularly the lack of organized information, the 
absence of a monitoring and evaluation system, a low level of 
community and local government participation, and an overly 
centralized management and decision making process.  Embassy 
agrees with the Global Fund approach of setting a tight 
deadline for performance.  The USAID mission will support 
COPRESIDA with technical assistance through contractor 
FHI/Conecta.  Embassy is cautiously optimistic that the 
change in administration, and particularly the change of 
leadership at COPRESIDA will revitalize this grant and 
associated programs. 
HERTELL 
"
"22484","11/4/2004 17:29","04SANTODOMINGO6052","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE234221","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006052 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EPSC:JYOUNG, L GUMBINER AND FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: XL, AMGT, APER, BEXP, ECON, EFIN, ENRG, ETRD, DR 
SUBJECT: SANTO DOMINGO PARTICIPANTS IN WHA ECONOMIC 
OFFICERS\' CONFERENCE 
 
REF: SECSTATE 234221 
 
1.  Embassy Santo Domingo will send econ officers Stephen 
Wheeler and Mark Kendrick, arriving Wednesday, December 8 and 
departing Friday, December 10. 
HERTELL 
"
"22493","11/4/2004 22:41","04SANTODOMINGO6061","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 006061 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, G/TIP FOR RACHEL OWEN 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON;LABOR FOR ILAB; 
USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD; TREASURY FOR OASIA-LCARTER 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, KWMN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ATTORNEY GENERAL WILL COORDINATE 
ANTI-TIP EFFORTS 
 
 
1. (U) Summary.  Dominican cabinet members and senior 
officials, meeting as a group with the Ambassador and Embassy 
staff on October 20 and 22, cited several instances of recent 
progress in combating TIP, including the creation of a new 
cyber-crimes unit in the Attorney General\'s office, the 
break-up of a child pornography ring in Santiago, and the 
implementation of a new Code for Minors and Adolescents, 
which creates stiffer penalties for exploiters of children. 
The Dominicans also promised to increase interagency 
cooperation in investigating and prosecuting trafficking in 
persons (TIP) cases, led by Attorney General Francisco 
Dominguez Brito.  On October 25, at an international TIP 
conference hosted by the International Organization for 
Migration (IOM), the Ambassador stressed that the Dominican 
Republic must do more to combat TIP.  At the same meeting, 
Dominguez Brito reconfirmed his engagement on TIP, calling 
for more aggressive prosecutions and sentences of up to 30 
years for traffickers.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) Background.  During the week of October 18-22, Embassy 
Santo Domingo followed up on June and August coordination 
seminars with advisors to incoming president Leonel Fernandez 
expected to assume key law enforcement duties, especially for 
trafficking in persons (TIP). After an Embassy half-day 
seminar on October 20 with senior staff from several 
Dominican agencies, on October 22 the Ambassador hosted 
cabinet officials, the head of the Armed Forces, and other 
officials newly designated to combat TIP.  The Ambassador and 
Attorney General Francisco Dominguez Brito also spoke at the 
inauguration of an international conference on the best 
practices for combating TIP hosted by the International 
Organization for Migration (IOM) the week of October 25-29. 
 
Staff Level Coordination 
 
3. (U)  On October 20, senior staff representatives of law 
enforcement entities and state secretariats met with the DCM, 
the Defense Attache, EcoPol officers, and USG law enforcement 
attaches for half a day. The group reached a consensus that 
the Attorney General\'s office should serve as the focal point 
of TIP investigations and prosecutions.  The action officer 
is Assistant Attorney General Frank Soto, head of the 
Attorney General\'s anti-TIP unit, an entity established by 
the previous administration. 
 
4. (U) Soto pointed to several positive recent steps, 
including the October 18 implementation of the 2003 Code for 
Minors and Adolescents, which provides greater legal 
protections for children and stiffer penalties for those who 
exploit them.  Soto said the Attorney General\'s office was 
establishing a cyber-crimes unit with help from the German 
Embassy, to investigate cases of child sexual exploitation. 
(Last month police in Santiago shut down a child pornography 
ring in Santiago that had sought to lure foreign clients by 
posting sexually explicit photos of young children and 
adolescents on the Internet.) 
 
5. (SBU) MFA Ambassador for Women\'s Affairs Luisa \"Chiqui\" 
Vicisoso said that the MFA was drafting a report on progress 
in anti-TIP efforts and is seeking multilateral commitments 
to fight cross-border trafficking, including that of Haitian 
migrant workers.  Participants wanted more coordination and 
cooperation among investigators, to establish whether given 
crimes involving alien smuggling met TIP criteria.  Colonel 
Cristobal Morales was the National Police representative, as 
director of the Falsifications Investigations Department, 
which includes the police anti-TIP unit.  Morales proposed a 
monthly interagency meeting to share information on TIP cases. 
 
Cabinet Level Coordination 
 
6. (SBU) The Ambassador reinforced these commitments at a 
lunch he hosted October 22 for cabinet members and heads of 
the agencies represented at the working group.  Foreign 
Minister Carlos Morales Troncoso, Armed Forces Secretary 
Sigfido Pared Perez, and Attorney General Francisco Dominguez 
Brito were the ranking attendees.  The Foreign Minister 
reciprocated the Ambassador\'s opening remarks by emphasizing 
the importance of fighting TIP and told the group that the 
Dominican Republic \"must improve\" its record on TIP.  Morales 
recounted some success stories, including a cleanup of 
corrupt Dominican consulates that had helped traffickers by 
selling visas and travel documents. 
 
7. (SBU) Attorney General Dominguez Brito welcomed the 
responsibility of coordinating anti-TIP action. Armed Forces 
Chief Pared Perez stressed the importance of controlling 
borders to make it harder to traffic or smuggle from Haiti 
and noted that agencies that provide security at seaports 
(CESEP) and airports (CESA) are particularly important in 
improving the Dominican Republic\'s reputation as a source and 
transit country for TIP.  Police Chief Manuel de Jesus Perez 
Sanchez raised the need to encourage \"denunciations\" of 
traffickers and to protect informants.  Minister for Women\'s 
Affairs Gladys Gutierrez called for more resources for women 
and families to encourage potential victims to stay in their 
home towns in the Dominican Republic and resist temptations 
offered by traffickers. 
 
8. (SBU) At the conclusion of the lunch, the Ambassador asked 
all of the agency heads to assure that their staffs receive 
the direction, time and resources to investigate and 
prosecute traffickers and to assist victims.  He endorsed the 
proposal for the Attorney General and the Attorney General\'s 
anti-TIP unit to lead in investigating and prosecuting TIP. 
All present agreed with this approach. 
 
Call for Increased Penalties 
 
9. (U) On October 25 the Attorney General made public once 
again his hard line against trafficking in his presentation 
at an well-publicized international TIP conference near Santo 
Domingo sponsored by the International Organization for 
Migration (IOM).  Dominguez Brito called for sentences of up 
to thirty years for traffickers, saying,\"There can be no 
impunity for traffickers.\"  He also said, \"We have a clear 
need to follow up on our prosecutions, because it is 
worthless to file charges and then not have a conviction.\" 
The Ambassador, in his presentation at the opening session, 
recognized the efforts of the Dominican Republic and the 
international community to fight TIP but stressed \"we must do 
more.\"  The Ambassador emphasized the theme of interagency 
and international cooperation, noting, \"Only through 
collective action can we meet the challenge presented by this 
epidemic.\" 
 
Comment 
 
10. (SBU) The commitments from the cabinet members and 
Dominguez Brito\'s strong public stand are in part the fruit 
of the persistent work of the Ambassador and Embassy officers 
in raising the awareness of the incoming administration on 
TIP and promoting an operational approach for an issue that 
affects many government agencies.  The Fernandez 
administration is focusing its law enforcement resources to 
improve the Dominican record on fighting TIP.  The framework 
is in place, the channels of communication are open, and the 
frank and zealous Attorney General is ready. The issue is now 
for the rest of the new administration to follow his lead. 
HERTELL 
"
"22514","11/5/2004 11:15","04SANTODOMINGO6062","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 006062 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/IFD/OMA; 
TREAS FOR LCARTER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, EFIN, DR, PGOV 
SUBJECT: IFIS ON DOMINICAN FINANCES - TIGHT TIMETABLE WITH 
A LONG WAY TO GO FOR STANDBY 
 
1.  (SBU) Despite progress on institutional reforms, the 
Dominican government still has a number of decisions to make 
before a new standby agreement can be reached with the IMF. 
Concerns about electricity sector reforms and and unanswered 
questions on fiscal problems mean that a tentative IMF Board 
date of December 13 might be overly optimistic.   A Dominican 
technical team plans to begin talks with the Fund in 
Washington the week of November 8, with political 
negotiations scheduled to begin November 15. 
 
------------------------------ 
Progress, but still more holes 
------------------------------ 
 
2.  (SBU) On November 1, local IMF, IDB and World Bank 
representatives met with the Ambassador to review the status 
of a new agreement.  IMF resrep Ousmene Mandieng (protect) 
told the Ambassador that the Dominican Republic has made 
significant progress on institutional reforms in preparation 
for an agreement, but added that many questions remain 
regarding electric sector problems, budget measures and the 
incomplete fiscal reform.  On the positive side, the 
government has increased the independence of the Central Bank 
and Banking Superintendency and also improved efficiency of 
debt management. 
 
3.  (SBU) Plans on timing of bank recapitalization and 
monetary policy have also progressed.  By the end of 
December, all banks must reach a 10 percent capital adequacy 
rate based on national standards, but will be given until the 
end of 2007 to reach international banking standards.  At 
present the size of the gap between local and international 
norms is not clear. While this is not ideal from the IMF 
perspective, Mandeng said, the long grace period was part of 
the original IMF standby agreement.  The Central Bank is 
moving to lengthen the duration of Central Bank certificates 
from the present one to six months to one to five years, and 
also plans to try to lower the cost of debt by substituting 
dollar linked debt for peso debt.  The Central Bank (CB)has 
been able to lower interest rates in recent months but they 
are still high in nominal terms (up to 30 percent in the last 
auction). Interest on the CB certificates is equivalent to 4 
percent of GDP; he expects that it will fall to about 1.5 
percent of GDP in 2005. 
 
4.  (SBU) Not enough progress has been made on fiscal reform. 
 Tax legislation passed in September did not provide the 
revenue originally sought and now any residual fiscal 
adjustment will have to be taken from the expenditure side, 
since the government has declared publicly that there will be 
no further tax increases.  There is no clear plan for where 
cuts will be made or how the Dominican government is to 
control contracting of new internal debt.  Cuts will have to 
come largely from current expenditures, not from the capital 
budget. 
 
5.  (SBU) For the troubled electricity sector, the IMF still 
requires from the government 1) credible projections of the 
monthly energy subsidy payments and transfers in order to 
calculate the budget ceilings; and 2) identification of 
specific concrete steps to be taken to reduce theft, improve 
collections and focus subsidies.   It is also still unclear 
where the Dominicans will secure much-needed external 
financing. 
 
6. (SBU) A small delegation led by Julio Ortegawent to New 
York last week to speak with commercial banks and 
bondholders, but no news of results is yet available. 
Dominican technicians will begin talks with the Fund in 
Washington during the week of November 8; political 
negotiations involving Technical Secretary Montas, Finance 
Minister Bengoa and Ortega are expected for November 15. 
 
-------------------------- 
Details and pre conditions 
-------------------------- 
 
7.  (SBU) Mandieng said that a new Fund program would 
probably be worth $600 million over 24-28 months.  Funds 
would be deposited in the Central Bank and could not be used 
to support the budget but only to finance the balance of 
payments gap. The program would be a continuation of the 
general lines of the previous agreement but would be more 
focused on institutional strengthening, with a tax reform 
required in 2006. 
 
8.  (SBU) Preconditions for the standby will include further 
consolidation of fiscal management under the Secretary of 
Finance.  Debt decisions currently managed by the Technical 
Secretary\'s office need to be transferred to Secretary of 
 
SIPDIS 
Finance, as does responsibility for the Office of the Budget. 
 The IMF also requires that the government procurement 
process be made more transparent. 
9.  (SBU) Whether or not a congressional approval of the 2005 
budget will be required for an IMF agreement hinges on 
timing.  If the IMF agreement approval process slips into 
January, the IMF would probably require congressional 
approval of the 2005 budget.   Even in the case that a 
congressionally approved 2005 budget is not required, an 
accurate and clear estimate of the level of internal debt, 
government payroll and revenues and all other budgetary 
information would be required by the IMF. 
 
10.  (SBU) Still unclear is the process to be used to 
liquidate government assets, some acquired in bank 
liquidations last year.   The Central Bank governor wants to 
set up an independent agency to liquidate assets (both those 
acquired from recently failed institutions and assets owned 
by the Central Bank over a longer period). 
 
11.  (SBU) The IMF will require the Dominicans either to 
continue servicing bonds or to demonstrate that they are 
actively renegotiating them, in which case the IMF can lend 
into arrears.  There is currently $63 million in 
non-reschedulable debt that must be cleared by the end of 
December in order to meet Paris Club and IMF requirements. 
 
12.  (SBU) The long discussed deal for cheap oil from 
Venezuela is a bright spot and constitutes direct budget 
support.  It will  offer generous terms of 2 percent interest 
over 15 years to finance 25 percent of 50,000 barrels a day 
of imported Venezuelan crude. This will be worth $200 million 
or more per annum.  Even so, the IMF model suggests that the 
government will have to find between $300 million and $400 
million to close the gap, much more than might be realized 
through a bond rescheduling. 
 
13. (SBU)  The IMF model uses projections of the exchange 
rate in 2005 at 37 versus the current 32 per dollar; GDP 
growth is predicted at 1.8 percent in 2004 and 2.5 percent in 
2005; oil will be at $50/barrel; inflation will be 12 to 15 
percent, with an end-2005 projection of 13.5 percent; 
expenditures on the electricity sector will be $400 million 
in 2005; and the free trade agreement will not be implemented 
before the end of 2005 (so that no adjustment will be 
required for loss of customs revenues until 2006). 
 
-------------------------- 
World Bank and IDB waiting 
-------------------------- 
 
14.  (SBU) World Bank Country Manager Christina Malmberg said 
that her agency has a loan of $100 million outstanding, $50 
million of which was paid out in March with the remaining $50 
million pending, held up for lack of an IMF agreement.  If 
the planned agreement goes to board, $25 million will be 
released for the energy sector.  The remaining $25 million 
for social sector expenditure will require the Dominican 
Republic to meet eight conditions, on all of which the 
Dominicans are still far short.  The World Bank loan 
authorization terminates in December 2004, and the Bank wants 
clear progress on conditionality before it will be willing to 
extend the loan offer for three months.  The World Bank also 
has two modest technical assistance loans for energy and 
financial management pending congressional approval, one of 
which is 60 percent earmarked for the Banking 
Superintendency. 
 
15.  (SBU) IDB Representative Moises Pineda said that the IDB 
has an outstanding loan of $250 million, with $50 million 
earmarked for social spending remaining to be distributed, 
pending the IMF agreement. IDB has requested an audit of the 
first disbursement to ensure that it was used appropriately. 
The government has continued to pay electricity generator 
COGENTRIX.  If the government contract with COGENTRIX falls 
into arrears or is abrogated, the IDB will have to pay a $70 
million guarantee, triggering calls on Dominican sovereign 
guarantees of $400 million, undermining any IMF agreement. 
HERTELL 
"
"22699","11/9/2004 17:39","04SANTODOMINGO6118","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04ASANTODOMINGO1606","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 006118 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/OMA; DEPT PASS 
USAID/LAC; DEPT PASS DOE; SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD; TREASURY 
FOR OASIA-LCARTER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/08/2009 
TAGS: ECON, ENRG, PGOV, EINV, DR 
SUBJECT: IMF POLICY PAPER - DRAFT SUMMARY OF THE DOMINICAN 
ENERGY SECTOR 
 
REF: A. REF. A SANTO DOMINGO 01606 
 
     B. REF B. SANTO DOMINGO 05740 
 
Classified By: EcoPol Counselor MMEIGS.  Reason:  1.4 (d). 
 
(1.)   (SBU) This message forwards a draft IMF summary of the 
plan of the Dominican government for dealing with energy 
difficulties. The Dominican Republic is currently suffering 
localized power outages of up to 12 hours a day due to poor 
government management of the sector, low collection rates by 
the distribution companies, the high cost of imported 
petroleum and the non-payment of government subsidies.  The 
current accumulated sector deficit  is USD 507 million and is 
expected to reach USD 650 million by the end of 2005.   After 
the inauguration of President Fernandez on August 15, the 
government borrowed USD 65 million from local banks to cover 
the costs of producing 70 percent of the country\'s 
electricity production, to continue subsidizing bottled gas 
and to buy time to develop a long-term plan for the energy 
sector.   In consultation with the World Bank, IDB and USAID, 
the administration developed a comprehensive plan to address 
the current energy crisis and delivered the plan to President 
Fernandez in October (REF. B). 
 
(2.)  (C)  The GODR energy plan calls for short term action 
until December 2005.  The plan includes a timetable for: (i) 
reducing losses and improving collection rates; (ii) better 
targeting of subsidies; (iii) improving the regulatory 
framework; (iv) reducing the cost of electricity generation; 
(v) roll over arrears with private electricity companies; and 
(vi) managing the power rationing. Here is a basic outline of 
the plan: 
 
- Reducing losses and improving collection rates. 
With the collaboration of the distribution companies, an 
aggressive loss reduction and collection increase plan will 
be gradually implemented, aimed at improving the overall cash 
recovery index of the distribution companies. The loss target 
(for December 2005 of Ede-Norte/Sur being 27 percent (down 
from 36 percent, mid-2004) and for Ede-Este 32 percent (down 
from 37 percent, mid-2004). The collection rate target (for 
December 2005) of Ede.Norte/Sur being 95 percent (up from 85 
percent, mid-2004) and for Ede-Este 93 percent (up from 81.5 
percent, mid-2004). 
 
- Better targeting of subsidies. 
Subsidies are to be focused on the small consumers, 
restructuring the tariff in three steps (November 2004), 
(December 2004) and (February 2005), overall resulting in an 
average tariff increase of about 30 percent. A new 
distribution model will be developed for the PRA (Program to 
Reduce Blackouts) areas in order to improve and reduce the 
targeting of this subsidy (paid with hydro, electricity) 
focused at small consumers whose consumption is not measured 
(third quarter 2005). 
 
Improving the regulatory framework. 
Uncontrollable costs (fuel prices, currency exchange rate and 
inflation) are to be passed through automatically to the 
final consumer tariffs, applying the appropriate indexation 
on a monthly basis, as opposed to the former quarterly basis 
(February 2005). Regulatory policies will be amended in order 
to facilitate expedite fraud detection and reduction efforts. 
(first quarter 2005) 
 
Reducing the cost of electricity generation. 
The plan includes an attempt at reducing the cost of 
electricity generation through the renegotiation of some 
power supply contracts. With a potential price reduction of 
about 1.0 US cents/KWh, the plan includes the renegotiation 
of the CESPM (Cogentrics) power purchase agreement contract 
with CDE (second quarter 2005), the SECLP (Smith-Enron) 
contract (third quarter 2005). Finally, an attempt will be 
made at renegotiating the terms of the so-called  Acuerdo de 
Madrid  (reduction of contract rates by generators in return 
for a one-time payment) (latest, December 2005). 
 
Roll over arrears with private electricity companies. 
In the short term, the plan is to roll over arrears and pay 
only the interest that accumulates on the debt (up to 
December 2005). Total interest payments during year 2005 are, 
estimated at US$60 million 
 
Managing the power rationing. 
Rationing of power will take place according to the 
collections of the various circuits. The level of rationing 
will linked to the overall results of the plan, the 70 
percent supply restriction to be reduced only when 
disbursement of public funds to coyer the current deficit gap 
is reduced to manageable figures (third quarter 2005). 
The need for public funds to close the current deficit gap of 
the electricity sector during year 2005, as a result of a 
successful implementation of this comprehensive plan, has 
been estimated at USD 219 million (assuming exchange rate of 
RD 40/USD and oil price of USD 50/barrel). The monthly 
requirements to be included in the national budget for year 
2005 are; 
 
Year 2005         million USD 
Jan /Feb /Mar     39 / 31 / 30 
Apr / May / Jun   30 / 23 / 20 
Jul / Aug- / Sep  13 / 14 / 12 
Oct / Nov / Dec   10 / 0 /    -3 
                  Net Total         219 
 
(3.)  (C) In the medium and longer term, the plan includes 
actions for: (i) clearing arrears with private electricity 
companies; (ii) private sector participation in Ede-Norte/Sur 
distribution companies; and (iii) reforming the regulatory 
and legal framework of the sector. The details follow: 
 
Clearing arrears with private electricity companies. 
The external financing required will be procured (late 2005), 
so as to develop a plan to clear arrears with private 
electricity companies (starting Jan 2006). A loan from the 
World Bank will be requested, reviewing the amount but, in 
line with a former loan request for the sector that was not 
considered viable by the Bank due to the country\'s failure to 
meet the IMF agreement of year 2003. Consideration will also 
be given to the possibility of financing the cost of 
doing-away with Independent Power Producer\'s contracts, 
having them compete in the market. 
 
Private sector participation in Ede-Norte/Sur distribution 
companies. 
Studies will be made, actions will be taken and terms of 
reference documentation will be made available, in order to 
be ready to conduct an international bidding process to award 
a performance based management contract of Ede-Este and 
Ede-Norte (first quarter 2006). 
 
Reforming the regulatory and legal framework of the sector. 
An ongoing review of the proper application of the regulatory 
framework in place will be done, correctives to be 
implemented as necessary. The legal framework will be 
reviewed and if need be, proposals for the amendment of laws 
will be submitted to congress (latest third quarter 2006). 
 
(4.)   (U) This report and others can be read on the SIPERNET 
at http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/ index.cfm 
along with extensive other current material. 
HERTELL 
"
"22700","11/9/2004 17:53","04SANTODOMINGO6119","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006119 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/ESC; DEPT PASS DOE; TREASURY 
FOR DO:LCARTER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EPET, EFIN, ENRG, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN - VENEZUELAN AGREEMENTS ON CONCESSIONAL 
PETROLEUM FINANCING AND DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION 
 
 
1.  During a November 6 stopover in Santo Domingo lasting 
less than twelve hours,  Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez 
signed with Dominican President Leonel Fernandez two 
agreements, the first providing favorable terms for Dominican 
purchase of Venezuelan petroleum products and the second 
encouraging greater cooperation in petroleum distribution and 
social affairs.  The politics and atmospherics of the visit 
will be reported septel. 
 
2.  The first agreement, referred to as the Caracas Energy 
Cooperation Agreement, provides concessional financing for 
the Dominican Republic to import 50,000 barrels of Venezuelan 
crude per day, with financing of between 5 and 25 percent of 
this amount for 15 years with one year\'s grace period at an 
annual interest rate of  2 percent .   The agreement 
specifies that the percentage of the 50,000 barrels to be 
financed be pegged to the world price for petroleum.   As 
long as oil remains at $25/barrel or above, the deal will 
provide financing of 25 percent of the amount contemplated in 
the agreement.  At full financing under the agreement, it is 
estimated to be worth $150 million to $200 million annually. 
 At the lower end of the scale, a world oil price of  $15 
dollars per barrel would allow the Dominicans to finance 5 
percent of the specified 50,000 barrels under the terms 
outlined in the agreement.  The  agreement will be subject to 
evaluation and adjustment according to Dominican purchases, 
the availability of Venezuelan product, and decisions by OPEC 
or any circumstance that obligates Venezuela to change the 
quota assigned under the agreement.  A similar agreement 
exists between Venezuela and Cuba and another is reportedly 
in the works with Paraguay. 
 
3.  The second agreement is referred to as the Integral 
Energy Cooperation Agreement.  It encourages the study, 
preparation and execution of joint projects for the 
exploration, extraction, production, transport, refining, 
storage, processing, distribution and commercialization of 
hydrocarbons.  It promotes training and development of human 
resources and the creation of mechanisms to exchange 
information, policies, legislation and  technology related to 
the petroleum sector. 
 
4.  During a press conference following the signing of the 
agreements, Presidents Chavez and Fernandez announced the 
creation of a \"mixed commission\" to advance sectors related 
to societal development in both countries.  It is to meet 
every six months.  The commission will include the Dominican 
Secretary of Industry and Commerce with the Secretary of 
 
SIPDIS 
Foreign Affairs, and the Venezuelan Ministry of Energy and 
Mining and the Foreign Minister. Press reports say that the 
mixed commission\'s goal will be to invent or seek out 
creative ways to \"advance development\" in Venezuela and in 
the Dominican Republic. 
HERTELL 
"
"22753","11/10/2004 16:18","04SANTODOMINGO6134","Embassy Santo Domingo","SECRET","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 006134 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INL/LP AND WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/07/2009 
TAGS: PREL, SMIG, KJUS, MARR, DR 
SUBJECT: (S) DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: AMBASSADOR, IMMIGRATION 
DIRECTOR DISCUSS CORRUPTION 
 
Classified By: NAS Director Richard Hawkins, reasons 1.4 (b,d). 
 
1.  (S) Summary:  The Ambassador and Immigration Director 
Baret discussed corruption in Dominican airports and ports on 
November 3, 2004.  The Ambassador named names, including 
military officers assigned to Immigration, and urged 
dismissal and prosecution.  Baret said prosecution was 
difficult, promised action, and asked for more USG help. 
Embassy learned on November 5 that Baret had arranged with 
the Armed Forces Secretary to have one of the leading 
offenders fired.  End summary. 
 
2.  (S) On November 3, 2004, Ambassador met with Dominican 
Immigration Director Carlos Amarante Baret on the subject of 
official corruption in the Immigration organization.  The 
meeting was called to inform and impress upon Director Baret 
the need to implement certain measures to combat corruption, 
especially in Dominican ports of entry.  Ambassador informed 
Baret that specific political appointees and inspectors 
within the General Directorate of Migration were preparing to 
smuggle people to the United States and Europe.  DCM, DHS, 
LEGATT, SAA, NAS, and CONS/Fraud Prevention attended the 
meeting. 
 
3.  (S) Ambassador told Baret Dominican alien smuggling 
organizations have developed a high level of smuggling 
expertise, created extensive logistical support 
infrastructures, and recruited a broad band of corrupt 
officials, including some colonels and general officers of 
the Dominican Armed Forces.  Embassy has received reports 
that employees of Immigration are regrouping after the change 
of government and recommencing their activities.  Ambassador 
told Baret migration inspectors are planning to smuggle 20 
children through El Cibao Airport, near Santiago.  This group 
of inspectors supports alien smuggling organizations that 
charge about USD 9,000 for each smuggled Dominican. 
Ambassador gave Baret names of three of the inspectors. 
Baret said the three plus one other had been or would soon be 
fired. 
 
4.  (S) Ambassador indicated some of the political appointees 
working for Baret had been involved in alien smuggling in the 
past.  He named several names, including the colonel in 
charge of military coordinators and the military coordinator 
at Santo Domingo\'s Las Americas airport, along with the 
latter\'s contact in Immigration.  Baret said he had recently 
discussed corruption with the colonel, named Luna, and said a 
subordinate of Luna\'s sends illegal migrants to European 
countries.  He complained that as soon as he fires one bad 
military officer, another bad one arrives.  He added the 
military coordinator at Las Americas had been interrogated 
the same day concerning a passport case.  DATT and Baret 
discussed whether to let the Armed Forces take action against 
their own people or to involve the Attorney General. 
 
5.  (S) Ambassador said Punta Cana airport, at the eastern 
tip of the island, is another area of concern.  He named 
names, including the supervisor who transferred a known 
people smuggler to Punta Cana and the supervisor of an 
Immigration shift that works with a military contact to 
smuggle aliens.  Baret said he knew the military man in 
question and thought he was a serious, religious, family man. 
 
6.  (S) Ambassador said Immigration in the past never had 
alien smugglers prosecuted.  He encouraged Baret to make an 
immediate change in that area.  Baret said a friend of his 
was approached by the brother of the former Immigration 
director, Siquio Ng de la Rosa, to propose the smuggling of 
four to five PRC nationals per month into the DR.  The 
brother offered the friend USD 1,000 per PRC national and 
Baret USD 5,000.  Baret said he wanted Ng and his brother 
prosecuted in the U.S.  (Note:  DHS is evaluating the 
available information and will decide whether or not to open 
an investigation.  End note.) 
 
7.  (S) DCM urged Baret not to permit the usual practice of 
moving the bad people to a different location.  She pointed 
out the possible impact on U.S.-Dominican cooperation if the 
DR were placed in Tier 3 after the February 2005 evaluation 
of their anti-Trafficking in Persons effort.  Baret said it 
was not easy to pull together the evidence for a trial, and 
the DCM urged administrative sanctions as a second-best 
alternative.  Baret said he had a team on the trail of 
smuggling organizations.  DATT said we must work with the 
Armed Forces to investigate these cases.  Baret said getting 
evidence against Luna, for example, would be difficult. 
LEGATT suggested taping conversations and filming meetings. 
 
8.  (S) Baret said that was possible, but he was going to get 
rid of the people whose names he had received.  He said Luna 
is a harder case, well connected.  DATT encouraged him to 
work with the Secretary of the Armed Forces to make his 
anti-smuggling work effective.  Baret said he was creating 
his own information network, and the Embassy was a great help 
to him.  He said, \"We\'re going to move on this.\"  NAS 
Director reminded Baret of the seriousness of TIP 
decertification and said the USG would perceive no excuse for 
the DR because of its recent change of government.  Baret 
asked for additional training from DHS, and the Attache 
promised continued support.  The meeting ended with a 
friendly sidebar between Baret and the Ambassador. 
 
UPDATE 
-------- 
 
9.  (S) On November 5, NAS Director learned that Col. Luna 
and others named by the Ambassador had been dismissed the 
previous day.  Later that morning, Armed Forces Secretary 
Sigfrido Pared Perez confirmed to NAS Director that Baret had 
visited him the previous day, and \"they had worked together 
to solve some personnel problems.\"  On November 8, daily 
Diario Libre reported that Immigration had fired 37 officials 
previously assigned to five airports and the ferry terminal. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
10.  (S) In matters relating to corruption, Embassy has high 
confidence in several ranking members of the current 
government.  The jury is still out on Baret, but initial 
impressions are good.  If his performance continues to match 
his words, action may finally be possible against the 
longstanding, Mafia-like smuggling networks whose nefarious 
dealings undermine Dominican border control and threaten U.S. 
homeland security. 
HERTELL 
"
"22885","11/16/2004 14:30","04SANTODOMINGO6198","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE228298","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 006198 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/PPC, G/TIP; 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, KCRM, KWMN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: INTERIM TIP ASSESSMENT 
 
REF: STATE 228298 
 
1. The following interim trafficking in persons (TIP) 
assessment (paras 2-7) addresses the questions in paragraph 
6L of reftel. 
 
2. The Government of the Dominican Republic has made progress 
in addressing TIP, particularly in the development of a 
comprehensive anti-TIP strategy and in increased 
investigation of TIP-related offenses.  Progress has 
accelerated since the change of administrations on August 16. 
 The Fernandez administration has appointed several highly 
regarded senior officials who offer promise in the fight 
against TIP and TIP-related corruption, including Attorney 
General Francisco Dominguez Brito and National Police Chief 
Manuel de Jesus Perez Sanchez, the former head of the police 
human rights office. 
 
3. The Dominican government has continued to improve its 
capacity to investigate and prosecute TIP.  The national 
anti-TIP strategy is now coordinated by the Attorney General, 
who has designated Assistant Attorney General Frank Soto to 
handle the day-to-day issues.  Director General of Migration 
Carlos Amarante Baret has established a designated anti-TIP 
unit that has begun to coordinate with similar units in the 
Attorney General,s Office and in the National Police.  In 
October, the Attorney General,s Office formed a special 
cyber-crimes unit to counter child pornography.  A new Minors 
Code was implemented in October, increasing penalties for the 
sexual exploitation and sexual abuse of minors to as much as 
30 years. 
 
4. Dominican authorities have conducted several raids and 
interventions under the new anti-trafficking law passed in 
2003.  For example, police in Santiago and Montecristi closed 
down bars that were fronts for prostitution rings in October, 
rescuing four children.  A child prostitution organization in 
Boca Chica was closed down in June.  More than 20 children 
were rescued and four people detained.  In addition, the 
Dominican Navy detained about 1800 illegal migrants in the 
waters between the Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico in the 
last six months, many of whom were potentially victims of 
trafficking.  Authorities have more vigorously investigated 
these migrant smuggling cases, in one case successfully using 
evidence collected by the U.S. Coast Guard and the Dominican 
Navy to support arguments for the pre-trial detention of 
smuggling organizers. 
 
5. High profile cases are still pending in the courts, 
including the Boca Chica child prostitution case and the 
cases of Congressman Radhames Ramos Garcia and accused alien 
smuggler Maria Martinez Nunez.  The Boca Chica child 
prostitution case went before an investigating magistrate in 
October, who found that the prosecution has sufficient 
evidence to bring the case before a trial judge.  The 
defendants are appealing this decision.  The latest hearing 
in the Ramos Garcia case took place on November 10 before the 
Supreme Court.  The four defendants and subpoenaed witness 
were present, but the defense raised several procedural 
objections that the court will consider before hearing 
additional testimony.  Martinez Nunez is currently in prison 
awaiting trial, where she has been since August 2003. 
 
6. Senior Dominican officials have spoken out publicly 
against TIP.  President Fernandez has declared several times 
at public events the intention of his administration to 
proceed against traffickers.  At the inauguration of an 
international conference on TIP hosted by the International 
Organization for Migration (IOM) in late October, Attorney 
General Dominguez Brito called for stiffest possible 
penalties for traffickers and emphasized his commitment to 
fighting TIP.  His comments were widely reported in the 
press.  Officials held a town-hall style meeting on TIP in 
Boca Chica, a resort town known as a hotspot for sexual 
tourism.  The meeting brought together participants from the 
Attorney General,s Office, Foreign Ministry, National 
Police, Tourist Police, and other organizations with about 40 
community leaders to discuss the dangers of TIP and encourage 
community involvement in identifying and reporting suspected 
traffickers and victims.  A similar program is planned for 
the beach resort of Sosua. 
 
7. The Dominican government continues to support training on 
TIP issues for officials.  The week-long IOM conference was 
attended by representatives from the Attorney General,s 
Office, Migration Directorate, Foreign Ministry, Ministry of 
Women, National Police and Armed Forces, and other 
secretariats and agencies with TIP-related responsibilities. 
 
SIPDIS 
The administration has established anti-TIP training as a 
permanent part of the required curriculum at the Diplomatic 
and Consular School, and the Foreign Ministry has now offered 
the course eight times.  In October five judges and six 
prosecutors attended a series of capacity-building seminars 
on TIP held by local non-governmental organization Fundacion 
Institucionalidad y Justicia (FINJUS). 
HERTELL 
"
"22905","11/16/2004 20:51","04SANTODOMINGO6213","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE243180","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 006213 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, INL; 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON;LABOR FOR ILAB; USCINCSO ALSO 
FOR POLAD;TREASURY FOR OASIA-LCARTER; 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/08/2014 
TAGS: DR, ENRG, HA, PGOV, PREL 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN POLITICS #8: FERNANDEZ, THE RIO GROUP 
AND HAITI 
 
REF: STATE 243180 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske.  Reason: 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1.  (C) Summary.  When the Rio Group summit of November 4 got 
to the agenda item on 
Haiti, Dominican President Leonel Fernandez asked for 
hemispheric help in 
re-instilling democracy in that &narco-state,8 but he put a 
big front wrong in 
advocating the inclusion in the process of former president 
Jean Bertrand 
Aristide.  Following a November 6 conversation with the 
Ambassador, Fernandez agreed that Aristide was distinct from 
Lavalas, and said he meant to say that groups with broad 
popular support needed to be included in the process.  The 
Ambassador and several other ambassadors see President 
Fernandez November 16 to discuss Haiti further, per reftel. 
 
2.  (C)  Dominicans are continually worried about the other 
half of Hispaniola, 
and with good reason -- perhaps a million Haitians reside in 
the Dominican 
Republic already, many of them undocumented.  The February 
2004 hostilities in 
Haiti did not cause any significant cross-border movements 
but the Dominican 
military temporarily reinforced the border and the Dominican 
Congress 
precipitately voiced its opposition to any eventual proposal 
to establish 
refugee camps on national territory. 
 
3. (C)   The official press release from the presidency 
offers an account of the Dominican positions at the meeting. 
(See para 4 below.)  It includes two 
elements of concern two us:  a calculated reference to 
Aristide and a quote 
from Hugo Chavez blaming &a large part of the disorder in 
that brother country8 
on the United States.  Chief of staff Danilo Medina said that 
the press release 
was not cleared elsewhere in the palace.  See septel for 
discussion of the Dominican-Venezuelan questions. 
 
4. (U)  Following is our informal translation of the release, 
which played 
extensively in the Dominican press: 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
(begin text) 
 
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.  The presidents of Latin America 
declared their 
determination to provide concrete help to Haiti in 
establishing a true 
democratic order where institutions function and all 
participants may be 
brought together for a dialogue on the future of the country. 
 
Responding to a proposal by President Leonel Fernandez, the 
heads of state and 
government meeting at the XVIII Rio Group Summit agreed in 
the need for the 
re-establishment in Haiti of peaceful coexistence and 
institutional order, so 
that in the future a constitutional convention may be 
assembled. 
 
President Fernandez, who offered an analysis of the 
historical roots of Haiti,s 
ingovernability, stated that in that Caribbean nation there 
exists a power 
vacuum and a great scarcity as a clandestine economy 
functions based on 
narcotics trafficking. 
 
&Haiti, a theme of discussion of the Latin American leaders 
participating in 
this summit, is a narco-state subjugated to poverty and human 
degradation, such 
that we the countries of Latin America have the historical 
responsibility of 
going to its aid,8 he emphasized. 
 
He said that within a democracy there should be participation 
of all sectors, 
and that in Haiti there is a political leader with great 
popular support, Jean 
Bertrand Aristide, who should be involved in the process for 
a democratic 
solution and establishment of stability and democracy. 
 
The Dominican leader called on the Rio Group to make a 
profound analysis of the 
Haitian situation, given this immense undertaking, so that 
the presence of the 
MINUSTAH can be transformed in a clear and decisive manner to 
cooperate in 
building a true state of laws. 
 
The Dominican president,s analysis of the Haitian crisis was 
seconded and 
approved by 11 of the presidents present, who in their 
remarks expressed 
support to the Dominican initiative seeking immediate support 
for Haiti. 
 
President of Venezuela Hugo Chavez, who will visit the 
Dominican republic this 
Saturday, said, &We should go to the aid of Haiti, but a 
great deal of the 
fault for the disorder in that brother country lies with the 
United States.8 
 
The president of Paraguay Nicanor Duarte said that countries 
meeting here 
should offer support for building a true democracy in haiti, 
with sovereignty 
and with respect for its cultural roots. 
 
The president of Panama Martin Torrijos backed the position 
of the Dominican 
leader and said that he was ready to offer cooperation in 
elections, welcoming 
the position of President Fernandez. 
 
At the same time, the Vice President of El Salvador, Ana 
Vilma de Escobar, 
spoke of the need to restore order and to organize a 
constitutional convention 
in which all participants can find consensus and will respect 
the rules of the 
game. 
 
&We should carry out a crusade to recover multi-lateralism, 
so that we can work 
at establishing order in Haiti, and then work in favor of a 
civilized 
co-existence where conversations about the future can 
begin,8 commented the 
president of Bolivia, Carlos Mesa. 
When his turn came, the president of Guatemala, Eduardo Stein 
Braillas, 
affirmed that the efforts to assist the Caribbean nation 
should be carried out 
jointly with the United Nations, but added the self-criticism 
that the 
countries of Latin America did not take decisions concerning 
that nation when 
they faced the need to do so. 
 
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, November 4, 2004.  Office of 
Information, Press, and 
Public Relations. 
 
(end text) 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
 
5. (C)  The Aristide comment appeared to come out of nowhere. 
 Fernandez had 
not previously discussed Aristide by name in conversations 
with us, or with our French and Canadian counterparts. 
 
6. (C) Perhaps the greatest surprise for us was the palace\'s 
presumption that 
there would be no downside.  The next-day in-house press 
analysis by 
Fernandez\'s strategy unit concluded that there was \"no risk\" 
associated with 
his comments and that Fernandez was \"presenting himself as an 
element of 
international cooperation.\" 
 
Fernandez Backtracks 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
7. (C) On November 6, during a pull-aside at a social event, 
the Ambassador admonished Fernandez that his reference to 
Aristide was a serious mistake, one 
that had the potential of further inflaming a situation 
already dangerous for 
the Haitian people and for the international peacekeeping 
force.  Fernandez 
replied that given popular support for Lavalas, it would have 
to be part of the 
situation.  The Ambassador was direct: Aristide had led a 
violent gang involved 
in narcotics trafficking and had squandered any credibility 
he formerly may 
have had.  \"Nobody has given me any information about that,\" 
Fernandez 
replied.  The Ambassador insisted that no supporter of human 
rights and 
democracy could in good conscience allow Aristide and his 
close supporters back 
into the situation in Haiti.  Fernandez listened and 
eventually agreed to 
distinguish between Aristide and Lavalas.  He asked for any 
information on 
Aristide that the United States might be able to share with 
him. 
 
7. (C) On November 9 the Ambassador, DCM and EcoPol chief 
questioned 
presidential chief of staff Danilo Medina about the reference 
to Aristide. 
Medina suggested that the President hadn\'t meant Aristide, 
but rather the 
Lavalas political movement; the Ambassador questioned that 
interpretation. 
Emboffs pointed out that Aristide had been named in the press 
release and 
questioned the inclusion in a Dominican press release of the 
anti-U.S. remark 
by Chavez.  Medina professed not to have seen or cleared the 
release, which had 
been drafted by the press office. He said that in future, 
press texts would be 
routed through his office before release. 
 
8.  (C)  The Ambassador meets with President Fernandez  to 
discuss Haiti (using reftel talking points) on the evening of 
November 16, accompanied by the French, Canadian, British and 
Spanish ambassadors.  We will report septel on the results of 
that discussion. 
HERTELL 
"
"22929","11/17/2004 12:37","04SANTODOMINGO6226","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE236869|04STATE237932|04STATE243652","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006226 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR IO/UNP AND DRL/MLA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM, PREL, DR 
SUBJECT: UNGA HUMAN RIGHTS RESOLUTIONS - DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
RESPONSE 
 
REF: A. STATE 236869 
     B. STATE 237932 
     C. STATE 243652 
 
1. Embassy on November 9 delivered demarches (refs A-B) on 
UNGA human rights resolutions and on November 16 the urgent 
demarche on Third Committee resolutions (ref C). 
 
2.  MFA UN/OAS affairs deputy director Rhadys Abreu de 
Polanco told us that she would have to await the return of 
Deputy FonMin Alejandra Liriano on November 20 to discuss the 
GODR\'s position on these resolutions.  However, Polanco noted 
that in the UN the GODR generally votes in favor of 
resolutions on countries \"where there are systematic 
violations of human rights,\" unless there are complicating 
\"bilateral factors.\"  She denied that the GODR would join any 
regional consensus to abstain on all human rights 
resolutions. 
 
3.  Embassy will report any further substantive response 
after November 20, if any. 
HERTELL 
"
"22930","11/17/2004 12:38","04SANTODOMINGO6229","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE240429","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","C O N F I D E N T I A L SANTO DOMINGO 006229 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR P-ALAN YU, IO/UNP-MOLLY PHEE, WHA/CAR-KJMCISAAC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/16/2009 
TAGS: PREL, IS, DR 
SUBJECT: OPPOSING ANTI-ISRAELI BIAS AT UNGA - DOMINICAN 
REPUBLIC 
 
REF: STATE 240429 
 
Classified By: ECOPOL Counselor Michael Meigs for Reason 1.5 (b) and (d 
). 
 
1. (C) Embassy delivered reftel talking points to MFA deputy 
director for UN/OAS affairs Rhadys Abreu de Polanco on 
November 16.  She said any decision on the GODR\'s position on 
the anti-Israel resolutions would have to await the return of 
Deputy FonMin Alejandra Liriano on November 20.  We will 
check back and report MFA\'s substantive reaction, if any. 
HERTELL 
"
"22931","11/17/2004 12:39","04SANTODOMINGO6232","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE243185","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006232 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
THE HAGUE FOR CWC DEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM, PREL, DR 
SUBJECT: CWC - NON-STATES PARTIES ENCOURAGED TO ATTEND 
CONFERENCE - DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
 
REF: STATE 243185 
 
(SBU) Embassy delivered reftel talking points November 16 to 
MFA international organizations deputy director Rhadys Abreu 
de Polanco.  She said the GODR\'s consul in Amsterdam has 
attended CWC meetings as an observer in the past, but she 
would have to consult with Deputy FonMin Alejandra Liriano 
after her return November 20 on what representation might be 
sent this time.  Embassy will check back and report any 
decision on the matter. 
HERTELL 
"
"22932","11/17/2004 12:40","04SANTODOMINGO6234","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE232089","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006234 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR IO/UNP AND WHA/CAR-MCISAAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC, KSEP, DR 
SUBJECT: 59TH UNGA: REPASCH CANDIDACY FOR JSPB - DOMINICAN 
REPUBLIC WILL SUPPORT 
 
REF: STATE 232089 
 
1.  Embassy delivered reftel demarche and talking points o/a 
October 29 to MFA UN/OAS deputy director Rhadys Abreu de 
Polanco.  On November 16 she informed poloff that the GODR 
will support the candidacy of Mr. Thomas Repasch for 
re-election to the UN Joint Staff Pension Committee. 
HERTELL 
"
"22933","11/17/2004 12:41","04SANTODOMINGO6238","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SANTODOMINGO5672","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006238 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR S/WCI, IO/UNP, AND L/UNA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KJUS, KAWC, PHUM, DR 
SUBJECT: U.S. NOMINEE MERON FOR ICTY - DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
WILL SUPPORT 
 
REF: A. SANTO DOMINGO 5672 (NOTAL) 
 
     B. STATE 214865 
 
1.  The MFA deputy director for UN affairs, Rhadys Abreu de 
Polanco, informed us November 15 that the Dominican Republic 
will support Judge Theodor Meron\'s candidacy for reelection 
as a permanent judge of the International Criminal Tribunal 
for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 
HERTELL 
"
"22937","11/17/2004 13:42","04SANTODOMINGO6240","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04SANTODOMINGO4719","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 006240 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, INL; 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON;LABOR FOR ILAB; 
USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD;TREASURY FOR OASIA-LCARTER 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/16/2014 
TAGS: PREL, ENRG, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN POLITICS #9 - CHAVEZ BRINGS GENEROUS 
FINANCING DEAL TO DOMINICANS 
 
REF: A. SANTO DOMINGO 4719 
 
     B. SANTO DOMINGO 6119 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske.  Reason: 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1.  (C)  Summary.  Venezuelan president Hugo Chavez made an 
eight-hour visit to Santo Domingo on November 6, the main 
event of which was the signature of a bilateral agreement 
called the \"Caracas Accord\" to provide generous  financing 
terms for 25 percent of 50,000 barrels a day of Dominican 
imports of Venezuelan petroleum.  Fernandez effusively 
greeted Chavez, but it is not yet clear whether Chavez will 
gain any political leverage with the Dominican president. 
The visit served Fernandez,s purposes in building up his 
profile as a regional leader, giving him a chance to build up 
the  domestic politics,  , and, above all, in securing the 
USD 200 million or more in fuel payment relief that will help 
make the IMF negotiations viable.  End summary. 
 
2. (SBU) Venezuelan president Hugo Chavez made an eight-hour 
visit to Santo  Domingo on November 6, during which he and 
Dominican president Leonel Fernandez  signed a bilateral 
agreement called the \"Caracas Accord\" providing generous 
financing terms for 25 percent of Dominican imports of 
Venezuelan petroleum. 
In addition, Fernandez and Chavez dedicated the Plaza Bolivar 
in downtown Santo  Domingo and Chavez presented the President 
with a replica of Bolivar\'s sword. 
 
3. (SBU)  The petroleum financing deal, reported ref b, 
provides badly needed  financial support as the Dominican 
Republic is negotiating terms for a renewed  IMF standby. 
Venezuela is providing 15-year financing with two years 
grace, at  an interest rate of 2 percent per annum -- 
concessions which are worth in the 
neighborhood of USD 200 million in 2005.  Since much 
petroleum is used by electricity generators, the arrangement 
may help reduce the power sector blackouts characteristic of 
that mismanaged and undercapitalized sector. 
 
4.   (SBU) At the televised press conference in the 
presidential palace Chavez  spoke with apparently sorrowful 
dignity about Venezuela\'s relations with the United States, 
alleging U.S. interference at the time of the coup attempt. 
He emphasized the extent of Venezuelan investment in the U.S. 
petroleum sector and  asserted that \"due to agreements signed 
by the previous government, Venezuela is in fact subsidizing 
U.S. fuel consumption by several dollars per barrel.\"   He 
said that a new ambassador (Amb. Brownfield) had assured him 
of U.S. 
interest in improving relations.  Chavez expressed hope that 
with his re-election President Bush would constitute a \"new 
government.\" 
 
5. (SBU) Fernandez responded by expressing his government\'s 
congratulations on the re-election of the American president. 
 He continued in professorial style, noting that the world 
had changed, with the Cold War years giving way to a new 
order after the disappearance of the Soviet bloc and then 
changing once again 
as a result of the attacks of September 11, 2001.  Both the 
Dominican Republic and Venezuela deplored the loss of 
innocent lives and would cooperate to stop terrorism. He 
recalled his telephone conversation with Chavez on the day of 
the attempted coup and their agreement to seek help from the 
Carter Center.  This sort of hemispheric cooperation, said 
Fernandez, was essential to resolving problems.  And then -- 
after all that as preamble -- he made the offer, much 
reported by the press, to help mediate between the Venezuelan 
and U.S. 
governments if that would be helpful.  (Fernandez was making 
publicly the same offer twice made in private to the 
Ambassador (reftels.)) 
 
6. (SBU) Chavez took the lectern again to express his desire 
to use petroleum to assist the poor of the 
hemisphere -- in Colombia, in the Dominican Republic, and in 
Haiti, \"where they don\'t even have the fuel for electricity 
for hospitals.\"  Venezuelan petroleum, he said, would serve 
as a modern version of Bolivar\'s sword, to encourage 
hemispheric unity.  He concluded with a grin, saying that 
ballplayers Sammy Sosa, Pedro Martinez, and other Dominicans 
\"can teach us how to defeat the Yankees.\"  The assembled 
dignitaries and press 
laughed. 
 
A Palace View 
------------------ 
 
7. (C) On November 9 the Ambassador, DCM and EcoPol counselor 
discussed the visit with presidential chief of staff Danilo 
Medina.  Medina said that the oil financing deal was vital to 
Fernandez as he sought to re-establish financial stability. 
(Medina and Technical Secretary Temistocles Montas had sought 
much more generous terms but were eventually told that OPEC 
obligations barred anything more than what the Dominicans 
received.)  Medina said we should have no doubt that the 
Dominican Republic counts \"100 percent, absolutely 100 
percent\" on its relationship with the United States.  Talk 
had been only of energy issues, including at the private 
meeting of the presidents, Venezuelan oil minister and 
development bank head, and Medina. 
 
8. (SBU)  Medina said the relation between the two dates back 
to 1997-1998, when Chavez, as a candidate for the presidency, 
asked to call on Fernandez and was received.  Medinas said 
Fernandez appreciated Chavez\'s concern for the disadvantaged 
and his desire to improve social services.  After leaving 
office in 2000, Fernandez was an associate of the Carter 
Center and in that role responded to the request of 
Venezuelan industrialist Gustavo Cisneros to help organize a 
dialogue between the private sector and the Chavez 
administration. 
 
Fernandez,s View of Chavez 
 
9. (C) Another of our sources, long close to Fernandez and an 
official in the first Fernandez administration, commented 
recently that in fact,  Fernandez \"hates\" Chavez and once 
commented to our source that Chavez is a \"madman.\"  Our 
source commented that Fernandez is obliged by financial 
necessity to welcome Chavez.  \"Fernandez has felt desperate 
to find ways to solve all the problems facing the Dominican 
Republic,\" he said, \"and he feels he is getting help from no 
one.\"  In our interlocutor,s view, the Venezuelan oil deal 
keeps electricity flowing, helps close a financing gap in the 
stand-by program, and provides some leverage against his 
enemies in the political opposition regarding an approach to 
the Dominican energy sector -- with little or no political 
quid pro quo. 
 
10.  (C)  This source,s report of negative feelings about 
Chavez is consistent with  Fernandez,s remarks to the 
Ambassador and Senator Nelson (FL) back in August, to the 
effect  that Chavez lacks leadership skills to move implement 
his agenda, lacks a plan for doing so, and \"has transformed 
nothing in Venezuela.\"  Fernandez called Chavez \"Fidel 
without talent, but with oil.\"  Fernandez said then that he 
had told Chavez that he must govern for all Venezuelans, not 
just for the poor, and he must  reach out to business and the 
economic elites.  ( reftel)  On the other hand, when we asked 
Danilo Medina what Fernandez admires about Chavez, the reply 
that Medina gave was  \"his social concern and social 
programs.\" 
 
Comment 
- - - - - - 
 
11. (C)  For this visit, we believe Fernandez was using his 
embrace of the Venezuelan president for several purposes: for 
building himself up as regional leader; for domestic 
politics, pleasing the aged in his party\'s base by likening 
Chavez to Caamano, the military officer who supported 
democratic  restoration in 1965; and, above all, for the USD 
200 million or more in fuel payment relief that will help 
make the IMF negotiations viable.  As for the longer-term 
question of the Fernandez-Chavez relationship, there is as 
yet no verdict regarding its nature and whether Chavez, gift 
of oil will win him any appreciable degree of political 
influence over Fernandez. 
 
12. (U) Drafted by Michael Meigs, Lisa Kubiske. 
 
13.  (U) This report and others in the series can be 
consulted on our SIPRNET site 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/     along with 
extensive other material. 
HERTELL 
"
"23011","11/18/2004 21:01","04SANTODOMINGO6280","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SECSTATE245175","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006280 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR G, OES, WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV, AORC, EAGR, ETRD, PREL, DR 
SUBJECT: ACTION REQUEST ON NEGOTIATIONS UNDER GLOBAL 
AGREEMENT TO PROTECT OZONE LAYER 
 
REF: SECSTATE 245175 
 
1. (SBU)  Dominican Foreign Minister Carlos Morales Troncoso 
received the Ambassador on November 18, heard out USG 
concerns from reftel concerning the requested U.S. allocation 
of methyl bromide under the Montreal Protocol, and readily 
assured the Ambassador that the Dominican Republic would 
support the U.S. position.  He said he would immediately 
issue instructions to that effect.  The Ambassador left the 
Department\'s non-paper with the Minister 
 
2.  (SBU) Morales Tronocoso commented that he believed states 
parties to the Protocol could register their votes 
electronically.  Embassy would appreciate information from 
Department on this point. 
 
3.  (SBU) EcoPol Counselor had raised the subject the 
previous day with MFA Under Secretary of State for Economic 
Affairs Juan Giuliani Cury, providing him the briefing 
material.  Giuliani Cury was in the Minister\'s outer office 
when the Ambassador arrived, a fact that suggests he was able 
to brief the Minister on the subject. 
HERTELL 
"
"23057","11/19/2004 15:03","04SANTODOMINGO6292","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 006292 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT/WHITE HOUSE PASS USTR FOR VARGO,RYCKMAN,MALITO, 
CRONIN; DEPT FOR WHA, WHA/CAR,WHA/EPSC, ED/TPP/BTA; NSC FOR 
SHANNON AND MADISON;GENEVA FOR MISSION TO WTO;USCINCSO ALSO 
FOR POLAD; TREASURY FOR OASIA-LCARTER; USDOC FOR 
4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION AND 
3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/18/2014 
TAGS: ETRD, PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN SENATORS SCHEDULE VOTE ON REPEAL OF 
PROTECTIONIST TAX BLOCKING CAFTA 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske.  Reason: 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (SBU) Summary.  Senate president Andres Bautista has 
scheduled a Senate vote to repeal the 25 percent tax on 
beverages sweetened with high fructose corn syrup (HFCS) for 
Saturday, November 20.  This move follows the Ambassador,s 
delivery of USTR Amb. Zoellick,s November 16 letter to 
President Fernandez, and frank exchanges between the 
Ambassador, Embassy officers, and Dominican senators at a 
November 18 lunch hosted by the American Chamber of Commerce. 
  The senators at lunch believe that they will have 
sufficient votes for repeal of the tax, to break the impasse 
of the past two months and forward the repeal bill to the 
House of Representatives, where we expect fewer problems.  We 
are optimistic that the Senate will vote to repeal the tax 
November 20 -- but the outcome is not assured, given the 
power of the sugar sector.  End Summary. 
 
Making A Strategy for Repeal 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
2. (C) Embassy Santo Domingo has worked closely over the past 
three weeks with 
Senate Trade Committee president Sen. Alejandro Santos and 
former Under Secretary of Industry and Commerce Hugo Rivera 
to coordinate a strategy for the repeal of the protectionist 
25 percent tax on fructose-sweetened drinks.  This has 
included strategy sessions with representatives of the 
American Chamber of Commerce (AmCham) and the Association of 
Free Zone Companies (ADOZONA). 
 
3.  (U) Both AmCham and ADOZONA have made strong public 
relations efforts in recent weeks concerning the benefits of 
the Free Trade Agreement (FTA) and the imminent danger of the 
exclusion of the Dominican Republic.  These efforts were 
greatly boosted by USAID\'s programming of a visit by 
contractor Pete Minor with a persuasive, well-documented 
projection of the country\'s standing as a garment exporter 
-- either with or without the FTA.  Minor\'s program in Santo 
Domingo and the second city, Santiago, expanded to include 
previously unplanned briefings, including one for senators. 
 
4. (C) Sen. Santos (protect) calculated in early November 
that he had an easy majority within his 12-member special 
committee but that in the Senate generally he could count for 
certain on only 12 votes.  Another 5 would be needed to 
assure passage in the event that all 32 senators were 
present.  Working together, Santos, Rivera and EcoPol 
counselor enlisted AmCham president Jorge Ivan Rodriguez to 
host a private luncheon at which the Ambassador could 
influence the most likely swing votes -- the senators from 
the border provinces with no sugar industry activities.  The 
event was planned for the week of November 8-12 but was 
delayed because key senators were traveling.  Since ADOZONA 
was putting together a high profile event in Santiago on 
November 15, after further changes the luncheon was set for 
Thursday, November 18.  The ADOZONA event gathered 
congressional representatives from 14 provinces for a 
well-publicized push in favor of the FTA at which Sen. Santos 
urged that action was urgent, in order to save the agreement 
(this was the theme we had chosen with him in our working 
sessions). 
 
Advising the President 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
5.  (C) On November 16 the Ambassador hand-delivered a letter 
signed by USTR Ambassador Zoellick to President Fernandez. 
President Fernandez told him he would actively encourage the 
Dominican congress to repeal the 25 percent tax on 
fructose-sweetened beverages and was optimistic that the 
congress would act.  Fernandez also firmly stated his 
intention for the Dominican Republic to remain in CAFTA. 
 
Free Trade for Lunch 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
6.  (SBU) At the November 18 lunch hosted by AmCham Vice 
President Kevin Manning, the Ambassador had the opportunity 
to speak at length with Senate President Andres Bautista and 
six other senators, among them Sen. Santos. Initially, 
several senators offered rationales for delaying work on the 
repeal, mentioning inter alia their \"patriotic duty\" to 
defend agriculture, the need for PRD party consultation, and 
the necessity of voting their consciences.  One senator 
expressed frustration that the Executive Branch had an 
attitude of acting as if the Dominican congress did not exist 
(a long valid complaint, just as applicable to the Mejia 
administration).  The Ambassador urged an early vote and 
Bautista responded that the time was not right because a 
delegation of eight senators is leaving for a ten-day trip to 
China next week. 
 
7. (SBU) Despite the excuses, it appeared that at least some 
senators had changed their views since approving the tax 
package including the 25 percent measure in late September. 
One senator from a heavily agricultural region said that he 
had originally favored the 25 percent tax but thorough 
evaluation of &what was right for the country8 had caused 
him to favor repeal.  Bautista said that during recent 
meetings in Guatemala his Central American counterparts 
appeared delighted at the prospect that the Dominicans would 
be excluded from CAFTA.  Another senator confirmed to the DCM 
that the sugar sector was no longer lobbying as vigorously as 
before. 
 
8. (U) The Ambassador emphasized that despite many promises 
over recent months of action on repeal, commitments had been 
avoided and the country had positioned itself for exclusion. 
AmCham VP Manning read aloud an AmCham translation of USTR 
Amb. Zoellick\'s letter to Senator Grassley advising him of 
administrative actions to remove the Dominican Republic from 
the FTA.  The Ambassador quoted from Senator Grassley\'s press 
release endorsing the move and underscored the seriousness 
with which Washington now viewed the situation. 
 
9. (SBU) By the end of lunch, discussion among the senators 
focused on the mechanics of arranging an early vote on the 
repeal measure.  They decided to schedule a highly unusual 
Saturday session for November 20, because otherwise the China 
trip would delay Senate consideration for at least two weeks. 
 
Comment 
- - - - - - - 
 
10. (C) The Saturday vote is a direct result of our 
campaigning with trade-friendly associations and the 
conversation at lunch.  We are optimistic that the Senate 
will pass the repeal in two successive readings that day. 
That said, the outcome is not assured, given the power of the 
sugar sector in the Dominican Republic. 
KUBISKE 
"
"23080","11/19/2004 18:35","04SANTODOMINGO6308","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 006308 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/19/2014 
TAGS: KJUS, PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: GODR ATTORNEY GENERAL TARGETS VEHICLE SCAM 
PARTICIPANTS 
 
Classified By: Michael Meigs, Economic/Political Counselor, reasons 1.4 
 (b) & (d). 
 
 1.  (U)  Summary.  On November 18 the Dominican Attorney 
General filed charges against 12 former officials and members 
of former President Mejia\'s party faction, all of them with 
ties to El Plan de Renovacion de Vehiculos (Plan RENOVE), a 
government program created in 2000 by the Mejia 
administration to finance the modernization of vehicles for 
public transportation.  Of those implicated, two were 
ministers in the Mejia administration and one was Secretary 
of the Armed Forces under President Balaguer.  Leaders of the 
Dominican Revolutionary Party (PRD) met immediately to 
denounce the arrests as  politically motivated.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (SBU)  Dominican Attorney General Francisco Dominguez 
Brito levied various charges of falsifying public and private 
documents, fraud, embezzlement, bribery, and conspiracy 
against 12 \"friends of Hipolito\" yesterday.  The 
investigation into the Plan RENOVE project established in 
2000 by President Hipolito Mejia was led by the 
Anti-corruption Department of the AG,s office, a department 
that drifted into virtual nonexistence under Mejia but has 
now reemerged in the second Fernandez administration as one 
of its forward leaning entities in the fight against 
corruption. 
 
3.  (U)  The three most prominent figures charged in the 
scandal are Pedro Franco Badia, former Minister of Interior 
and Police under Mejia, Siquio Ng de la Rosa, former Director 
of Migration and Minister without Portfolio under Mejia, and 
retired Admiral Ramon Emilio Jimenez,  Secretary of the Armed 
Forces under President Balaguer.  The former director of Plan 
RENOVE, Fabio Ruiz Rosado, is also one of the named 
defendants. 
 
4.  (U)  All defendants are accused of profiting from a 
program developed to upgrade the public transportation fleet. 
 Less than two weeks after taking office in August 2000, 
President Mejia signed an executive order creating a program 
of low interest loans for the purchase of vehicles to be used 
for public transportation.  The program was controversial 
from the outset.  In April of this year the Dominican 
Comptroller General denounced serious irregularities in the 
accounting practices and financial operations at Plan RENOVE, 
and newspapers headlined accusations of fraudulent loans, 
missing funds, and vehicles  purchased for the personal use 
of friends and family of Plan RENOVE officials. 
 
5.  (SBU)  President Mejia was quoted at the time as saying, 
\"if there is an act of corruption, the (responsible 
individual) will go to prison.\"   Mejia later backed off 
those statements and commented that the auditors of Plan 
RENOVE should be the ones incarcerated.  Mejia\'s attorney 
general at the time, Victor Cespedes Martinez, said that the 
audit must have been falsified; he maintained that if there 
were sufficient evidence of this, the drafters of the audit 
would be brought to trial.  No charges were filed against the 
auditors or any other parties.  The story lost steam in the 
press and Plan RENOVE was on the back burner until yesterday. 
 
6.  (U)  The Attorney General\'s office had all officials 
arrested yesterday and is requesting that the investigating 
magistrate deny them bail.  The accusation is that the frauds 
perpetrated by the defendants resulted in a loss to the 
government of one billion pesos (US $ 33.33 million).  (Some 
of these losses may affect foreign banks that loaned to the 
program, including the Import/Export Bank of Korea, the Ing. 
Bank of N.V. of Seoul, the Ing. Bank of Amsterdam, and 
Nataxis Popular Bank.)  A bail hearing is scheduled for 
November 19, 2004.  The AG,s office also charges that at 
least 100 vehicles purchased with Plan RENOVE funds, with a 
value of US $ 3.5 million, cannot be located. 
 
7.  (U)  Leaders of the Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD), 
including former President Mejia, met immediately after the 
charges became public.  Mejia called the move \"part of a 
show,\" implying that the Fernandez administration is trying 
to discredit Mejia\'s administration and the PRD.  PRD 
Secretary General Vicente Sanchez Baret accused the AG,s 
 
SIPDIS 
office of arresting the defendants without cause and 
infringing on their due process rights.  He said the PRD 
would pay for the costs of the defense. 
 
8.  (U)  Badia went one step further, asserting that 
President Fernandez ordered his arrest in retaliation for his 
months-old accusation that Fernandez had received checks from 
the now defunct Baninter.  \"In an abuse, the President of the 
Republic has ordered my arbitrary detention.\"  Ruiz, in what 
could be perceived as an admission of involvement in fraud, 
told the press that although many have been implicated in the 
case, those with ties to the current administration have been 
excluded from the investigation. 
 
------------ 
Comment 
------------ 
 
9.  (C)  Our sources have long told us that Plan RENOVE was 
corrupt, a source of graft and an easy means of putting cash 
into the hands of PRD party faithful.  The fact that credible 
allegations of misappropriation of funds were made while 
Mejia was still in power lends credence to the AG,s charges. 
 The Fernandez administration has made the fight against 
corruption one of its pillars, and Plan RENOVE participants 
were a logical choice to target for investigation.  Early 
indications are that the AG,s Department of Anti-corruption 
has evidence that can be used to convict some, if not all, of 
the named defendants.  Whether a weak judicial system will 
withstand political pressure in these high interest cases is 
an open question. 
 
10.  (C)  We expect continued posturing in the press by the 
PRD as well as by officials of Fernandez\'s Dominican 
Liberation Party (PLD).  The PRD will call these cases 
political prosecutions and the PLD will stress the importance 
of these cases in the countrywide fight against corruption. 
Each side has an element of the truth, but on this issue the 
balance tips in favor of the PLD.  The initiation of 
prosecutions of Plan RENOVE participants may offer the 
prospect of a long awaited break in the tradition of impunity 
for Dominican politicians. 
 
11.  (U)  Drafted by Angela Kerwin. 
 
12.  (U)  This piece and others can be found at our SIPRNET 
site 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/  along with 
extensive other material. 
KUBISKE 
"
"23081","11/19/2004 18:35","04SANTODOMINGO6309","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE3704","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006309 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), L/LEI (FUENTES, TAYLOR) 
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE FOR CRIM/OIA (MAZUREK, ORJALES, 
SOKOHL) 
U.S. MARSHAL SERVICE PLEASE PASS TO C. DUDLEY 
DEA FOR OF,OFI,DO, DOC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CJAN, KJUS, KCRM, PINR, SNAR, PREL, DR 
SUBJECT: GODR EXTRADITES 11 FUGITIVES 
 
REF: A. STATE 03704 
 
     B. STATE 24572 
     C. 03 STATE 343815 
     D. 03 STATE 347620 
     E. 03 STATE 343388 
     F. 03 STATE 262070 
     G. 03 STATE 310979 
     H. 03 STATE 246577 
     I. STATE 25752 
     J. 03 STATE 249037 
 
 1.  (U)  On November 18, 2004, 11 fugitives were extradited 
from the Dominican Republic in the company of U.S. Marshals 
and courtesy of the DEA air wing.  They were as follows: 
 
a. Francisco Billini, reftel A, wanted to stand trial in the 
U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York on 
federal money laundering and narcotics charges. 
 
b.  Jorge Canela, reftel B, wanted to stand trial in the U.S. 
District Court for the Southern District of New York on 
federal narcotics charges. 
 
c.  Jeremias Gomez, reftel C, wanted to stand trial in the 
U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York on 
armed robbery/bank robbery charges. 
 
d.  Agustin Henriquez, reftel D, wanted to stand trial in the 
U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York on 
federal narcotics charges. 
 
e.  Francisco Antonio Martinez, reftel E, wanted to stand 
trial in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of 
New York on federal narcotics charges. 
 
f.  Osvaldo Pache, reftel F, wanted to stand trial in the 
U.S. District Court for the District of Massachusetts on 
federal narcotics charges. 
 
g.  Manuel Antonio Paulino, reftel G, wanted to stand trial 
in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia on 
federal narcotics charges. 
 
h.  Ramon Pimentel, reftel H, wanted to stand trial in the 
U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Florida on 
federal narcotics charges. 
 
i.  Bienvenido Roa, reftel I, wanted for the imposition of a 
sentence in connection with his guilty plea in the U.S. 
District Court for the Southern District of Florida on 
federal narcotics charges. 
 
j.  Rafael Rodriguez Carvajal, reftel J, wanted to stand 
trial in the U.S. District Court for the Middle District of 
Pennsylvania on federal narcotics charges. 
 
k.  Joel Nunez, wanted to stand trial in the U.S. District 
Court for the Southern District of New York on federal 
narcotics charges. 
 
2.  (U)  These 11 successful extradition cases mark the first 
fugitives extradited during the second administration of 
President Leonel Fernandez.  They are the fourteenth through 
twenty-fourth fugitives extradited from the Dominican 
Republic to the United States in 2004. 
KUBISKE 
"
"23090","11/19/2004 21:20","04SANTODOMINGO6315","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SECSTATE243314","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006315 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/EX MARY MCBRIDE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: APER, AMGT 
SUBJECT: WHA SUMMER 2005 INTERN PROGRAM 
 
REF: SECSTATE 243314 
 
Santo Domingo is interested in participating in the WHA 
summer 2005 intern program.  The following information as per 
reftel: 
 
A. Number of internships offered: Two interns a) Economic 
intern b) Consular intern 
 
B. Language requirement: 
      a)Political/Economic intern - Spanish min 2  2 
b)Consular intern - Spanish min 3 3 
 
C. N/A 
 
D. Section to be assigned: a)ECOPOL, b)Consulate 
 
E. Post intern coordinator: 
      Stephen Wheeler 
      Chief, Economic Unit 
      809.731.4293 (office) 
      809.686.4038 (fax) 
      WheelerS@state.gov 
 
F. Specific duties and projects intern will perform: 
 
1)The ecopol intern will cover duties normally assigned to a 
second tour officer, as full participation in the activities 
of a busy 7 person economic and political section in a 
country friendly to the United States, subject to economic 
difficulties and institutional weaknessess. This may include: 
 
-- Producing written material, including summaries of current 
political and economic topics, memoranda of conversation, 
biographic material, briefing material for the Ambassador, 
and, if the opportunity arises, drafts for telegraphic 
reports to the Department of State. 
 
-- Possibility of participation in demarches to Dominican 
officials in visits of USG officials and in representational 
events. 
 
-- Daily review of local newspaper, identifiaction of topics 
of interest to the USG. 
 
--  Involvement producing material for the Embassy\'s 
classified Website serving the USG. 
 
-- As warranted, travel outside Santo Domingo for orientation 
and investigation. 
 
A memorandum of performance is prepared at the end of the 
assignment. 
 
2) The consulate intern would be directly supervised by the 
Deputy Consul General or by a Unit Chief.  While the intern 
would not be doing line consular work, the person would be 
given research Projects commensurate with a first - or - 
second- tour Foreign Service Officer, which includes 
producing memoranda and drafting cables or reports to the 
Department; attending meetings with Dominican officials and 
other consular contacts; reviewing local newspaper and 
electronic media for topics of interest to the Consular 
section; and as arranged, travel outside Santo Domingo for 
meetings and investigations.  A memorandum of performance 
will be prepared at the end of the assignment. 
 
G. Housing: Embassy cannot guarantee that USG housing will be 
available for an intern.  Once possible dates are known we 
can seek to identify housing that may be available between 
tenants or house-sitting opportunities; if necessary, we can 
seek to put an incoming intern in contact with possible 
sources for short-term rental of a simple furnished room or 
apartment.  The Embassy has no funds to pay for housing. 
 
H. Visa requirements: Officially, the Dominican Republic 
requires a visa to enter the country. However, a tourist visa 
valid for a limited stay can be purchased upon arrival at 
national airports, including at the airport in Santo Domingo. 
The cost is USD 20.  There may be a modest additional fee 
upon departure (perhaps USD 5) if the traveler stays beyond 
the time period indicated. 
 
I. Innoculations required: None (if expecting to travel 
extensively outside urban centers, vaccinations for Hepatits 
A and B are recommended) 
 
J. Deposits required: None. Cash, travelers checks and 
personal checks can be exchanged at local banks, including at 
a branch located at the Embassy chancery. 
KUBISKE 
"
"23209","11/23/2004 18:21","04SANTODOMINGO6338","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO6308","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006338 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KJUS, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN RENOVE OFFICIALS GET BAIL 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 06308 
 
1.  (U)  Summary.  After a lengthy hearing on November 19, 
2004, the Dominican officials charged with embezzlement in 
the RENOVE scheme (reftel A), were released on bail and/or on 
their own recognizance.  The cases will move forward under 
the new Dominican criminal procedural code.  The released 
officials from the previous administration claimed a moral 
victory in avoiding pretrial detention and continued to 
maintain their innocence.  End Summary. 
 
2.  (U)  Late afternoon on Friday, November 19 Judge Victor 
Martinez granted bail to seven of the 12 former officials 
charged with embezzlement and related crimes in the RENOVE 
case.  Johnny Morales, unregistered local representative for 
Hyundai Motors, was placed under house arrest.  A second 
defendant, Sam Goodwin, was charged but not arrested because 
he is presumed to be outside the country. Pedro Franco Badia 
(Minister of Interior and Police under President Mejia), 
Admiral Ramon Emilio Jimenez (Secretary of the Armed Forces 
under President Balaguer), and Gervacio de la Rosa were 
released on their own recognizance.  For six of the remaining 
defendants bail was set at RD $1 million (US $33,333) each; 
the seventh defendant\'s bail was RD $ 5 million (US $ 
166,665).  Various defendants were ordered to remain in the 
country and to report monthly to the Anti-Corruption 
Department of the Attorney General\'s office. 
 
3.  (U)  The Attorney General and the Santo Domingo District 
Attorney both commented that the cases will continue through 
the normal procedures.  AG Dominguez Brito noted that the 
bail hearing did not represent a defeat for the prosecution 
but only the first step in a lengthy  process.  The new 
Criminal Procedural Code, in effect only since September 27, 
applies to the case. 
 
4.  (U)  The Dominican Revolutionary Party (PRD) of former 
president Hipolito Mejia claimed a moral victory in that no 
former official remains behind bars pending trial.  Press 
coverage was heavy all weekend, repeatedly presenting the 
image of Badia leaving the courthouse with his arms raised in 
victory. 
 
----------- 
Comment 
----------- 
 
5.  (SBU) The early public perception seems to be that the 
RENOVE officials will escape prosecution.  This may be 
because the public does not understand the new procedures in 
the criminal procedural code.  Prior to the implementation of 
the code, prosecutors commonly held defendants for lengthy 
unspecified periods during investigation by the judge of 
instruction.   The new code precludes this practice and 
requires timely bail hearings.  The general public has the 
impression that because no one is incarcerated, the case 
against them has failed.  The Attorney General and the 
District Attorney haven\'t successfully countered this public 
spin. If, as expected, the judge of instruction finds 
sufficient evidence for the case to go forward,  the public 
may be treated to a different view of judicial possibilities. 
 
6.  (U) Drafted by Angela Kerwin. 
 
7.  (U) This piece and others can be found at our SIPRNET site 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/  along with 
extensive other material. 
 
 
KUBISKE 
"
"23214","11/23/2004 19:26","04SANTODOMINGO6339","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","01STATE66137","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006339 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), L/LEI (FUENTES AND TAYLOR) 
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE FOR CRIM/OIA (MAZUREK, ORJALES, 
SOKOHL) 
U.S. MARSHAL SERVICE PLEASE PASS TO CHRIS DUDLEY 
DEA FOR OF,OFI,DO,DCO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CJAN, KJUS, PREL, PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: GODR EXTRADITES TWO FUGITIVES 
 
REF: 01 STATE 66137 
 
 1.  (U)  On November 20, 2004, two fugitives were extradited 
from the Dominican Republic in the company of U.S. Marshals. 
Jose M. Guzman, reftel A, is wanted to stand trial in the 
Eastern District of New York on federal narcotics charges. 
Jose Bonilla is wanted to stand trial in the Supreme Court of 
the State of New York in Kings County where the most serious 
of numerous charges he faces are two counts of murder in the 
second degree. 
 
2.  (U)  These two extradition cases represent the twelfth 
and thirteenth fugitives returned to the United States during 
the second administration of President Leonel Fernandez. 
They are the twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth fugitives 
extradited from the Dominican Republic to the United States 
in 2004. 
KUBISKE 
"
"23450","11/30/2004 20:45","04SANTODOMINGO6413","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 006413 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB - WILSON 
WHITE HOUSE PASS USTR FOR MALITO, PECK, SOUDER, VARGO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, KIPR, EINV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC FAILS TO PRODUCE REPORT ON 
BROADCAST PIRACY 
 
 
1. The Dominican Republic missed an October 5 deadline 
established in a side letter to CAFTA obligating the 
government to report on actions it is taking to stop 
television broadcast piracy.  When the National Organization 
for Copyright Protection (ONDA) provided a preliminary copy 
of the late report to the Embassy in November, it failed to 
address the broadcast issue in any detail. 
 
2. Background:  Dominican trade negotiations with the United 
States on CAFTA included a side letter on IPR enforcement 
that focused specifically on television broadcast piracy. 
The side letter contains a requirement that the Dominican 
Republic \"take all necessary steps to halt television 
broadcasting piracy by licensed broadcasting stations and to 
provide a deterrent to future infringements.\"  The Dominicans 
promised to provide the United States with a written report 
describing progress in stopping television broadcasting 
piracy, including criminal, administrative and civil 
investigations and actions.   The deadline for the first 
report was October 5, sixty days after CAFTA was signed. 
Despite the side letter commitments, we see no indications 
that he Dominicans are taking new actions to reduce 
television broadcast piracy. 
 
3.  Embassy contacted various Dominican Government agencies 
prior to the October 5 reporting deadline to determine 
whether the government would meet its obligation.  EcoPol 
Counselor and Economic Officer met with the Assistant 
Attorney General responsible for IPR issues Pedro Fliz 
Montes de Oca, Undersecretary for Industry and Commerce 
Marcello Puello, Ministry of Foreign Affairs Undersecretary 
for Economic Affairs Juan Giuliani Cury, and the new Director 
of the National Organization for Copyright Protection (ONDA) 
Marino Feliz Tererro.  At the beginning of October, Feliz 
told Econ Officer that ONDA accepted responsibility for 
preparing the report but expected not to meet the October 5 
deadline.  ONDA gave the Embassy an advance copy of the 
preliminary report on November 5, which touches only 
peripherally on broadcast issues and instead describes 
ONDA,s organizational structure and documents raids and 
confiscations of pirated music compact discs and cassette 
tapes.  As of November 5, Feliz had not met with any 
television broadcasting stations to address broadcast piracy. 
 
4.  On November 23, EcoPol Counselor and Economic Officer 
discussed illegal television transmissions with Jose Rafel 
Vargas, president of INDOTEL, the Dominican Institute of 
Telecommunications, and met later with his deputy, Jose 
Rizek.  Vargas expressed concern over the continuing problem 
of television broadcast piracy but confirmed that ONDA is the 
agency with the authority and the responsibility to go after 
illegal broadcasters. 
 
5. Broadcast piracy is nothing new in the Dominican Republic 
but the tough new Dominican copyright legislation, Law 65-00, 
introduced in 2000, was designed to help stop the problem. 
Legal actions taken against violators under the new law have 
been disappointing.  There are two cases that were brought 
before the Dominican courts in 2002 involving television 
channels accused of making illegal broadcasts:  Telemicro and 
Canal del Sol. The stations continue to broadcast.  In 
November of this year, Telemicro (channel 5) aired on late 
night television Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King. 
To our knowledge, this latest Lord of the Rings movie has not 
yet been released in the United States on cable television 
(HBO has first release rights) and Telemicro,s broadcast is 
illegal. 
 
6. The public here sees powerful local television stations as 
untouchable by the authorities, an assumption borne out by 
the fact that illegal broadcasts continue to be a problem.  A 
local attorney and businessmen told Economic Officer of 
several second-hand accounts of threats and other rough 
treatment of government officials and private individuals 
working to stop illegal broadcasts.  Telemicro, a Dominican 
station previously owned (and possibly still controlled) by 
Hatuey de Camps, former head of the Partido Revolucionario 
Dominicano (PRD), has reportedly used its political influence 
and threats to keep illegal programming on the air.  Local 
press reported that the station was a major supporter of 
President Fernandez in the last campaign, providing free 
airtime for campaign advertising (a credible allegation, 
since renegade Hatuey de Camps openly supported Leonel 
Fernandez against PRD candidate Hipolito Mejia). 
 
7. In addition to Telemicro and Canal del Sol, numerous 
smaller, less well-known stations probably are in violation 
of copyright laws.  VIRUS, a new station carried by the 
second largest cable television provider in Santo Domingo, 
Aster Cable, shows many recent, poorly-dubbed Hollywood 
releases.  The newness of the films, making them high cost, 
does not coincide with the fact that the station almost 
exclusively plays local, low-revenue advertising.  Economic 
Officer asked ONDA to determine whether the station is 
illegally broadcasting movies. 
 
8. Unless otherwise instructed, Embassy will prepare a 
diplomatic note referring to the August 5 agreement by 
exchange of notes for the Dominican authorities to provide 
the enforcement reports, noting the delay, and requesting 
prompt submission. 
 
9. Comment:  Even where resources are readily available that 
would help determine whether stations are making illegal 
broadcasts, neither ONDA nor other interested government 
agencies are using them. At least two services in Santo 
Domingo make complete, round the clock recordings of all 
broadcasts made by local stations.  While the legal status of 
these services is unclear, the listings of broadcasts are for 
sale and would offer agencies such as ONDA ready information 
to help determine if a station is breaking the law.  More 
than identification of violators is necessary.  The best way 
to present a winnable case against an offending station is to 
have the backing of a private plaintiff/attorney to see the 
case through the courts to completion.  Without an aggressive 
plaintiff with a vested interest (apart from the government 
agencies involved) we do not expect that cases against 
offenders will be brought to trial or pursued with the vigor 
necessary to win them. 
HERTELL 
"
"23451","11/30/2004 21:08","04SANTODOMINGO6415","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 006415 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC PASS USPTO; DEPARTMENT PASS LIBRARY OF COMMERCE FOR 
COPYRIGHT OFFICE; STATE FOR EB - WILSON; WHITE HOUSE PASS 
USTR FOR MALITO, PECK, SOUDER, VARGO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD, KIPR, EINV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC FAILS TO PRODUCE REPORT ON 
BROADCAST PIRACY 
 
 
- -  CORRECTED COPY ADDING USDOC, USPTO, LOC/COPYRIGHT - - 
 
1.  Note proposed Embassy action, para 9. 
 
2. The Dominican Republic missed an October 5 deadline 
established in a side letter to CAFTA obligating the 
government to report on actions it is taking to stop 
television broadcast piracy.  When the National Office for 
Copyright Protection (ONDA) provided a preliminary copy of 
the late report to the Embassy in November, it failed to 
address the broadcast issue in any detail. 
 
Background 
- - - - - - 
 
3.  Dominican trade negotiations with the United States on 
inclusion in the Central American Free Trade Agreement 
(CAFTA) included a side letter on intellectual property 
rights enforcement that focused specifically on television 
broadcast piracy.  The side letter contains a requirement 
that the Dominican Republic \"take all necessary steps to halt 
television broadcasting piracy by licensed broadcasting 
stations and to provide a deterrent to future infringements.\" 
 The Dominicans promised to provide the United States with a 
written report describing progress in stopping television 
broadcasting piracy, including criminal, administrative and 
civil investigations and actions.   The deadline for the 
first report was October 5, sixty days after CAFTA was 
signed.  Despite the side letter commitments, we see no 
indications that the Dominicans are taking new actions to 
reduce television broadcast piracy. 
 
4.  Embassy contacted various Dominican Government agencies 
prior to the October 5 reporting deadline to urge the 
government would meet its obligation.  EcoPol Counselor and 
Economic Officer met with the Assistant Attorney General 
responsible for IPR issues Pedro Fliz Montes de Oca, 
Undersecretary for Industry and Commerce Marcello Puello, 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Undersecretary for Economic 
Affairs Juan Giuliani Cury, and the new Director of the 
National Organization for Copyright Protection (ONDA) Marino 
Feliz Tererro.  At the beginning of October, Feliz told Econ 
Officer that ONDA accepted responsibility for preparing the 
report but since the staff was entirely new since the August 
16 inauguration of the Fernandez administration, he expected 
not to meet the October 5 deadline.  ONDA gave the Embassy an 
advance copy of the preliminary report on November 5, which 
touches only peripherally on broadcast issues.  The report 
instead describes ONDA,s organizational structure and 
documents raids and confiscations of pirated music compact 
discs and cassette tapes.  As of November 5, ONDA Director 
Feliz had not met with any television broadcasting stations 
to address broadcast piracy. 
 
5.  On November 23, EcoPol Counselor and Economic Officer 
discussed illegal television piracy of programs with Jose 
Rafel Vargas, president of INDOTEL, the Dominican Institute 
of Telecommunications. EcoPol counselor later met separately 
with his deputy, Jose Rizek.  Vargas expressed concern over 
the continuing problem of television broadcast piracy but 
said that ONDA, not INDOTEL, is the agency with the authority 
and the responsibility to go after illegal broadcasters. 
Vargas said that INDOTEL had provided resources on at least 
one occasion when ONDA was investigating a case of piracy. 
 
6. Broadcast piracy is nothing new in the Dominican Republic 
but the tough new Dominican copyright legislation, Law 65-00, 
introduced in 2000, was designed to help stop the problem. 
Legal actions taken against violators under the new law have 
been disappointing.  There are two cases that were brought 
before the Dominican courts in 2002 involving television 
channels accused of making illegal broadcasts:  Telemicro and 
Canal del Sol. The stations continue to broadcast.  In 
November of this year, Telemicro (channel 5) aired on late 
night television Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King. 
To our knowledge, this latest Lord of the Rings movie has not 
yet been released in the United States on cable television 
(HBO has first release rights) and Telemicro,s broadcast is 
illegal. 
7. The public here sees powerful local television stations as 
untouchable by the authorities, an assumption reinforced by 
the fact that illegal broadcasts continue to be a problem.  A 
local attorney and businessmen told economic officer of 
several second-hand accounts of threats and other rough 
treatment of government officials and private individuals 
working to stop illegal broadcasts.  Telemicro, a Dominican 
station previously owned (and possibly still controlled) by 
Hatuey de Camps, former head of the Partido Revolucionario 
Dominicano (PRD), has reportedly used its political influence 
and threats to keep illegal programming on the air.  Local 
press reported that the station was a major supporter of 
President Fernandez in the last campaign, providing free 
airtime for campaign advertising (a credible allegation, 
since renegade Hatuey de Camps openly supported Leonel 
Fernandez against PRD candidate Hipolito Mejia). 
 
8. In addition to Telemicro and Canal del Sol, numerous 
smaller, less well-known stations probably are in violation 
of copyright laws.  VIRUS, a new station carried by the 
second largest cable television provider in Santo Domingo, 
Aster Cable, shows many recent, poorly-dubbed Hollywood 
releases.  The newness of the films, making them high cost, 
does not coincide with the fact that the station almost 
exclusively plays local, low-revenue advertising.  Economic 
Officer asked ONDA to determine whether the station is 
illegally broadcasting movies. 
 
9. Proposed Action:  Unless otherwise instructed, Embassy 
will prepare a diplomatic note referring to the August 5 
agreement by exchange of notes in which Dominican authorities 
undertook to provide the enforcement reports, noting the 
delay and requesting prompt submission. 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
10. Even where resources are readily available that would 
help determine whether stations are making illegal 
broadcasts, neither ONDA nor other interested government 
agencies are using them. At least two services in Santo 
Domingo make complete, round-the-clock recordings of all 
broadcasts made by local stations.  While the legal status of 
these services is unclear, the listings of broadcasts are for 
sale and would offer agencies such as ONDA ready information 
to help determine if a station is breaking the law.  More 
than identification of violators is necessary. Without an 
aggressive plaintiff with a vested interest there appears to 
be little likelihood in the short term that cases against 
broadcast pirates will be referred for prosecution or pursued 
with the vigor necessary to convict offenders. 
HERTELL 
"
"23550","12/2/2004 17:02","04SANTODOMINGO6466","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04STATE248337","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006466 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CCA AND WHA/CAR-MCISAAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CU, ETTC, DR 
SUBJECT: CUBA: COUNTRY-BY-COUNTRY REVIEW RE SUSPENSION OF 
TITLE III OF LIBERTAD ACT 
 
REF: A. STATE 248337 
 
     B. SANTO DOMINGO 3825 
 
1. (SBU) In response to para 6 Ref A, Embassy finds there has 
been no marked change in the Dominican Republic\'s situation 
with regard to Cuba since our last report (Ref B). 
 
2. (SBU) The administration of President Fernandez, which 
took office August 16, has so far taken a low profile on 
Cuban issues.  As in previous years, the Dominican Republic 
in October joined the overwhelming majority of nations that 
approved a UNGA resolution criticizing the U.S. economic 
embargo against Cuba.  On November 25-26 in Santo Domingo, 
Dominican and Cuban officials held annual discussions on a 
program of technical cooperation and exchanges for 2005, 
continuing arrangements established under a 1998 agreement 
(details forthcoming septel). 
 
3. (SBU) Embassy considers that U.S. national interests and 
the actions of the Dominican Government fully justify a 
renewal of the waiver of Title III of the Libertad Act with 
regard to Dominican businesses that may be involved in joint 
ventures with the Government of Cuba or significant trade 
with Cuba.  Embassy inquiries have not resulted in 
identification of any Dominican companies or entities with 
investments or joint ventures that would trigger Title III 
concerns.  There is very little Dominican investment in Cuba, 
and Embassy has no information about any conflict between 
Dominican investors and U.S. citizens with property claims in 
Cuba.  Embassy has not received complaints by any U.S. 
citizens against any Dominican company related to any 
investment in Cuba or DR-Cuba trade. 
 
4. (SBU) The past Dominican administration cast a crucial 
vote to pass the Cuba resolution in the 60th Human Rights 
Commission meeting in Geneva.  The new administration, in 
office since August 16, is still defining its foreign policy. 
 If the suspension of Title III were not renewed and a U.S. 
citizen were to bring suit against an entity under Title III, 
its extraterritorial reach could affect the possibility of 
obtaining future Dominican support for diplomatic initiatives 
on behalf of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Cuba. 
HERTELL 
"
"23551","12/2/2004 18:27","04SANTODOMINGO6472","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04TAIPEI3667","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 05 SANTO DOMINGO 006472 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, WHA/USOAS, EB/TPP/BTA, 
EB/IFD/OMA, EAP/CM, EAP/TC; STATE PASS AIT/W; NSC FOR 
SHANNON, MADISON; LABOR FOR ILAB; 
USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD; TREASURY FOR OASIA-LCARTER 
STATE PASS USTR FOR VARGO, RYCKMAN, MALITO, CRONIN 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/02/2009 
TAGS: PREL, ETRD, EINV, EPET, CH, TW, DR, XE 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN POLITICS #10: SANTO DOMINGO, BETWEEN 
TAIPEI AND BEIJING 
 
REF: A. TAIPEI 3667 (NOTAL) 
 
     B. TAIPEI 3666 (NOTAL) 
     C. SANTO DOMINGO 6298 
     D. USDAO SANTO DOMINGO IIR 6 827 9970 05 231631Z 
        NOV 04 (NOTAL) 
     E. BRIDGETOWN 2684 (NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske for reason 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (U) This is #10 in our current series on politics in the 
Dominican Republic: 
 
Santo Domingo, Between Taipei and Beijing 
 
(C) Summary and comment:  Beijing\'s global campaign to 
isolate Taiwan has reached the Dominican Republic, the 
largest Caribbean island nation that maintains diplomatic 
relations with Taipei.  The Fernandez administration is 
clearly interested in the People\'s Republic of China as a way 
to expand his nation\'s economic opportunities and broaden its 
international relationships.  Fernandez has said he wants to 
\"strengthen ties\" with the PRC and talks of making a swing 
through ethnically Chinese Asia and South Korea next spring, 
and he has named a deputy director for a planned Dominican 
trade office in Beijing (in addition to the existing office 
in Hong Kong).  Privately, the Foreign Minister commented to 
the Ambassador November 18 that Dominican recognition of 
Beijing might be inevitable over the long term, but not right 
now.  Comment:  All of this activity comes in the context of 
a Dominican Republic in dire need of economic support, headed 
by a president who, in his first term, opened Dominican 
relations with Cuba.  We don\'t foresee Dominican recognition 
of Beijing in the near future, but cannot rule out the 
possibility sometime in the next few years.  End summary and 
comment. 
 
Renewed Expressions of Interest 
------------------------------- 
 
(SBU) Beijing\'s global campaign to gain international ground 
over Taiwan has reached the Dominican Republic, the largest 
Caribbean island nation that maintains diplomatic relations 
with Taipei.  Two commercial/investment technical delegations 
from the People,s Republic of China (PRC) visited in early 
November, a PRC music and dance troupe performed here 
November 27-30, and a Chinese athletic group is expected in 
December. 
 
(SBU) In addition, nine of the 32 Dominican senators were in 
China November 22-29 as guests of the PRC; the group included 
Senate President Andres Bautista (opposition PRD) and the 
only senator of the ruling PLD, Jose Tomas Perez.  Their 
itinerary included meetings and/or dinners with the PRC vice 
ministers of foreign affairs and trade, leaders of the 
National People\'s Assembly (NPA), subdirector Wang Yulin of 
the international department of the Central Committee of the 
Chinese Communist Party, and local officials in Beijing, 
Guaylin, Shenzhen, and Shanghai.  We understand that the 
group received VIP treatment with motorcade escorts and was 
accompanied throughout the 10-day visit by Vice Foreign 
Minister Ji Peiding.  Many PRC officials, including the NPA 
president, reportedly expressed their government\'s desire for 
diplomatic relations with Santo Domingo. 
 
(SBU) This visit follows a recent trip to the PRC by 
Dominican Ambassador to the United States Hugo Guilliani 
Cury, seeking Chinese investment in export-oriented factories 
in the Dominican Republic.  Dominican senators had also been 
guests of Taipei authorities in mid-2004 and caused a brief 
stir when a Taipei legislator reported speculation by PRD 
Senator Ramon Albuquerque that the incoming administration 
might want to recognize the PRC. 
 
Pressure for Recognition 
------------------------ 
 
(C) During a call by the Ambassador on President Fernandez 
November 9, one of the PRC delegations was waiting in the 
anteroom to meet with Fernandez.  The group was led by Huai 
Zhongmin, president of the Association of Foreign Exchanges 
of Dalian municipality, and accompanied by PRC commercial 
representative in Santo Domingo Cai Weiquan.  Long-time 
Dominican leftist Miguel Mejia, recently named as a minister 
without portfolio, arranged the meeting and accompanied the 
visitors.  A former MFA official in charge of Caribbean 
affairs, Mejia has regularly served as a behind-the-scenes 
facilitator for Dominican contacts with the PRC, Cuba, and 
Venezuela.  He is said to have contacts with North Korea and 
to have traveled there as well. 
 
(C)  Taipei\'s ambassador to the Dominican Republic Feng 
Chi-tai (John) told poloff that Huai in his meeting with 
Fernandez had \"crudely\" and explicitly conditioned the 
proposed investments on the Dominican Government\'s 
recognizing the PRC.  Fernandez, resenting the pressure, 
abruptly terminated the meeting, according to Feng. 
 
(C) The MFA official in charge of Asian affairs told us that 
the Chinese delegation, in a separate meeting with Foreign 
Minister Carlos Morales Troncoso, had proposed establishment 
of diplomatic relations.  Foreign Minister Carlos Morales 
Troncoso subsequently commented to the Ambassador that 
recognition of China might be inevitable over the long term, 
but not now.  China is a reality, Morales said, and the 
Dominicans have probably benefited Taipei more than Taipei 
has benefited them. 
 
Proposed Investment in Technology and Tourism 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
(C) Morales told the Ambassador that the PRC provincial 
officials were interested in investment in technology.  A 
Chinese firm was bidding on a \"turnkey investment\" in Higuey 
in the eastern Dominican Republic that would involve bringing 
in almost 300 Chinese laborers and technicians.  An under 
secretary of tourism informed us that PRC investors were 
 
SIPDIS 
looking at tourism investments in the country, reportedly \"if 
the Dominican Republic recognizes Beijing.\"  As we have 
already reported (Ref C), the three most likely bidders for a 
50 percent interest in the new Caucedo container port are two 
mainland Chinese companies and one Hong Kong firm. 
 
(U) Chinese commercial representative Cai Weiquan has been 
busy and visible.  He told the media that the recent 
delegation offered technical assistance on \"ocean areas,\" 
environment and natural resources, education, health, and 
other matters, and he suggested creating a mixed commission 
to oversee these efforts.  The technical delegation is 
reported to have met with the Dominican ministers of 
environment, industry and commerce, and sports.  According to 
some reports, the group also mentioned a possible Chinese 
purchase of Dominican bonds or Paris Club debt.  Taipei\'s 
Ambassador Feng told poloff that a second PRC technical 
delegation, from Chongqing city (Szechuan province), had been 
in Santo Domingo shortly before the group from Dalian. 
 
Presidential Trip to Asia 
------------------------- 
 
(C)  President Fernandez, in a lunch with media executives 
November 25, said he planned to travel to Asia next spring: 
PRC, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore, Malaysia, and South Korea. 
 He wanted to strengthen ties, he said.  He understood that 
Taiwan would be unhappy about this, but that the PRC was 
offering Taiwan a \"one country, two systems\" model in which 
Taiwan could keep its own systems.  He thought many in Taiwan 
could accept such an arrangement. 
 
Taiwan Not Idle, but Pessimistic 
-------------------------------- 
 
(U)  Not coincidentially, investors from Taiwan led by 
Minister without Portfolio Lin Yi-fu (economic adviser to the 
prime minister) arrived November 21 for a one-day visit to 
inaugurate a technology-related project and explore others. 
Taipei\'s Ambassador Feng said that the visit was organized 
hastily in response to the PRC initiatives, came 
\"unprepared,\" and would be unlikely to generate much 
investment.  Feng\'s view:  Taipei can only encourage 
investors to engage; Beijing can order them to do so. 
 
(SBU) Feng said the PRC has \"targeted\" the Dominican Republic 
to increase trade, investment, and assistance, part of an 
effort to obtain recognition.  He said that Dominicans are 
exploiting the opportunity to extract maximum benefit from 
both China and Taipei.  He shared his views on the margins of 
the dedication of a computer and English language training 
center in Santiago set up by PLD Senator Perez, entirely 
equipped with machines donated by Taiwan. 
 
(C) Taipei\'s ambassador sketched his beleaguered situation. 
Despite substantial Taiwan assistance here (approximately USD 
70-80 million over the past 5-6 years), Feng sees his 
influence gradually slipping.  But he seemed certain that 
diplomatic relations would survive for the time being.  Prior 
to the August 16 inauguration of President Fernandez, he had 
told Feng that the Dominican Republic would continue to 
recognize Taiwan while expanding economic relations with the 
PRC. 
(C) Feng has had other frustrations as well.  In July 
President Mejia inaugurated a new regional hospital in the 
southwestern city of Azua; Taiwan financed USD 15 million of 
the USD 19 million cost.  But lacking essential equipment and 
staff to be provided by the government, the facility stands 
empty. 
 
(C) Feng\'s doubts about his position here are compounded by 
what he sees as Taiwan\'s deteriorating relations with the 
United States and divisive domestic politics.  (Note:  A 
member of the Nationalist Party, Feng spent seven years in 
Washington early in his career.  End note.)  He was critical 
of his government\'s acquisitions of expensive military 
equipment from the United States for defense against China at 
a time of escalating economic exchange and migration across 
the Taiwan Strait. 
 
Big-Ticket Investments 
---------------------- 
 
(C) The assistance, investment, and trade offered by the PRC 
to the Dominican Republic far outstrip Taiwan\'s resources, 
Feng acknowledged.  He said Caracas and Beijing have proposed 
exploration for offshore oil in Dominican waters, using 
Venezuelan capital and Chinese technical know-how. 
 
(C) China Minmetal\'s proposed USD 5 billion purchase of the 
Canadian Falconbridge mining enterprise could affect the 
situation here, according to Feng.  Our mining sector 
contacts say that Falconbridge operations in the Dominican 
Republic have not been visited by any Chinese.  Feng asserts 
that once the Canadian corporation is sold, the Dominicans 
will supply the PRC with iron and nickel, since the Chinese 
firm will have 87% of the shares of the Dominican affiliate. 
This \"brilliant move\" will also enable Beijing to leverage 
its investment clout into political and diplomatic influence 
in Santo Domingo, he fears. 
 
Trade with the PRC 
------------------ 
 
(U) PRC exports to the Dominican Republic amount to some USD 
150 million annually and are more likely to grow than 
Dominican exports to China.  The efforts of the PRC 
commercial office here since its establishment in 1994 have 
paid off in a trade surplus of more than USD 100 million. 
 
(C) The memorandum that established commercial relations 
provided for Dominican trade offices in Beijing and Hong 
Kong.  The Dominicans converted their consulate in Hong Kong 
to a commercial office after the former crown colony\'s 
integration into the PRC, postponing plans for Beijing. 
According to MFA Under Secretary for Consular Affairs Rosario 
Graciano, President Fernandez has just named Roger Casado 
Alcantara as deputy director of an office in Beijing -- but 
has not yet named a director, provided a budget, or trained a 
staff. 
Investment and Aid from Taiwan 
------------------------------ 
 
(SBU) According to the press, current Taiwan investment here 
exceeds USD 100 million in more than 70 firms, which directly 
provide 3500 jobs.  The Taiwan firms are active in free-zone 
administration and industries including paper, textiles, 
acrylics, plastics, aluminum products, printing, 
horticulture, photography, computing, and food processing. 
Taipei is also reportedly assisting small business 
development.  In August, the Dominican Confederation of Small 
and Medium Enterprise (CODOPYME) signed a cooperation 
agreement with the Association of Small and Medium Enterprise 
of the Republic of China, the Textile Federation of Taiwan, 
and the Federation of Industries of Taiwan. 
 
2. (U) Drafted by Bainbridge Cowell. 
 
3. (U) This piece and others in our series can be consulted 
on our classified SIPRNET site 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/  along with 
extensive other material. 
HERTELL 
"
"23598","12/3/2004 17:46","04SANTODOMINGO6492","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006492 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR; AGRICULTURE FOR FAS; DEPT/WHITE HOUSE 
PASS USTR FOR A MALITO, S CRONIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, EAGR, ETRD, PGOV, PREL 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN AGRICULTURE SECRETARY DEFENDS FREE TRADE 
AGREEMENT 
 
 
1.  On December 1 Dominican Secretary of Agriculture Amilcar 
Romero replied to an anti-trade-agreement diatribe at a 
national ceremony with a reasoned defense of the free trade 
agreement with the United States and Central America (CAFTA) 
and advised ranchers and farmers that agriculture will have 
to move away from traditional protectionism to a more 
competitive approach. 
 
2.  The Dominican Association of Ranchers and Farmers 
(Asociacion Dominica de Hacendados y Agricultores or ADHA) 
held its annual merit awards ceremony for outstanding 
ranchers and farmers on December 1.  The ADHA is the oldest 
livestock and agricultural association in the Dominican 
Republic (DR) and second in importance only to the Patronato 
Nacional, which is strictly a livestock group.    Dominican 
President Leonel Fernandez and Secretary of Agriculture 
Amlcar Romero both attended the event, as is traditional. 
Embassy Agricultural Counselor attended the event as a 
special guest, as is customary. 
 
2. The two featured speakers were Csar Contreras, President 
of ADHA, and Secretary of Agriculture Romero.  (President 
Fernandez did not give remarks and declined to speak to the 
press as he was leaving the event.)  ADHA President Contreras 
spoke first and repeated several of the scare statistics of 
the effects of the implementation of CAFTA --  500,000 jobs 
would be lost in the agricultural sector (100 percent of all 
jobs in agriculture) and the country could never compete with 
U.S. products benefiting from USD 40 billion in subsidies. 
Contreras said that the Dominican agricultural sector lacked 
the infrastructure and access to credit necessary to be 
competitive.  He called upon President Fernandez to defend 
the Dominican agricultural sector and renegotiate the 
agreement.  Adamantly anti-CAFTA literature was placed at 
every seat at the event:  the bi-monthly publication of the 
Dominican dairy association (APROLECHE) and a handout from 
the Agricultural Emergency Committee (Comite de Emergencia 
Agropecuaria --organized and funded principally by sugar and 
fertilizer interests). 
 
3.  Agriculture Secretary Romero delivered a strong, 
economically sound counter-message.  In front of an audience 
that had just heard that the free trade agreement would be 
the death of the Dominican agricultural sector, he gave a 
reasoned and moderate speech, commenting that the old ways of 
protecting producers through quotas, tariffs, and customs 
restrictions were things of the past and that structural 
change was necessary in the Dominican agricultural sector to 
make it more competitive.  Romero acknowledged the 
apprehension in the agricultural sector with respect to the 
free trade agreement.  He emphasized, however, that the 
country cannot remain isolated and agriculture must turn 
weaknesses into strengths.  The message he was delivering, 
with President Fernandez seated beside him, was that the DR 
has to pass the FTA and then make the structural changes in 
the agricultural sector necessary to compete in the world 
economy. 
 
 Comment 
 
4.   It took a lot of courage for the Secretary to give this 
speech to an audience that had just given a resounding 
applause to President Contreras,s anti-FTA remarks. 
Although President Fernandez did not take an active role in 
the event, his presence was a silent endorsement of the 
content of Secretary Romero,s speech. 
HERTELL 
"
"23639","12/6/2004 11:06","04SANTODOMINGO6498","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 006498 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/OMA; 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON;LABOR FOR ILAB; USCINCSO ALSO 
FOR POLAD;TREASURY FOR OASIA-LCARTER 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN POLITICS #11: FERNANDEZ\'S SPEECH ON HIS 
FIRST 100 DAYS 
 
 
1. (SBU) Following is number 11 in our series on 2004 
Dominican politics. 
 
Fernandez\'s Speech on his First 100 Days 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
First announced for the 100th day of his administration, 
November 25, President Leonel Fernandez\'s speech was 
postponed until Monday night, November 29, at 8 p.m.  The 
President recorded it at a studio at Congress in late 
afternoon but the broadcast on all TV channels and radio was 
delayed until 9, then until 10, and finally actually went on 
the air after 11 p.m., cutting off other local broadcasts. 
This greatly annoyed some baseball fans, who were biting 
their nails over the outcome in extra innings of a game 
between leading teams Licey and Aguilas. The delay also 
greatly reduced the audience; the President spoke near 
midnight instead of in prime time.  It transpired that the 
long delay was due to insertion into the tape of graphs, 
charts, and graphics of the newspaper comments cited by the 
President. 
 
It was probably just as well that the audience was small. 
Although Fernandez clearly enjoyed delivering the speech, it 
would have been nearly incomprehensible for the average 
Dominican.  The first quarter of the 19-page address dealt 
with international finances and economics, and Fernandez 
loaded it down with statistics and jargon (\"achieving an 
inverted yield curve. . . .\").  This was not a stump speech 
-- there was a single line that stood out as quotable, and 
that was his emphatic promise of using a \"tough hand against 
crime.\"  He appeared to be talking to the small world of 
thirty-something international financial analysts that he 
mentioned in passing in his August 16 inaugural speech, with 
perhaps an offering as well to any academics who were 
seriously trying to score his party\'s progress in achieving 
the goals announced in its campaign platform.  One theme 
conspicuously absent was that of international trade and the 
difficulties facing his bill to repeal the protectionist tax 
standing as an obstacle to Dominican participation in the 
free trade agreement with the United States and the Central 
American countries (CAFTA). 
 
Our precis of the speech follows.  The full text in Spanish 
is posted on the Santo Domingo SIPRNET site. 
- - - 
 
President Fernandez,s Speech on His First 100 Days in Office 
November 29, 2004 
 
President Fernandez reviewed the errors of the previous 
government, going into great detail of the failure to pay 
international debts, the electricity crisis and its effects 
on the population, the devaluation and instability of the 
peso, and rampant inflation. 
 
Fernandez said that there has been great change in the last 
three months. He credits the collaboration of different 
sectors such as the National Congress, business, the Catholic 
church, civil society, public opinion leaders, and 
functionaries and employees of the government with achieving 
numerous goals in the first 100 days of his administration. 
 
The bulk of his speech focused on the economic situation of 
the Dominican Republic. He stated that the economy had 
greatly improved since he took office on August 16. Fernandez 
emphasized his point by quoting a Miami Herald article that 
said the \"economy of the Dominican Republic is showing signs 
of improvement since Leonel Fernandez assumed the 
presidency.\" He went on to list the many achievements of his 
administration: 
 
Economy 
- - The confidence of economic agents has been recouped 
causing a spectacular fall in the price of the dollar from 
$42.21 to $29.63 or 12.58RD meaning that the value of the 
peso against the dollar has increased 30% 
 
- - The goal of the current administration is to stabilize 
the peso at a rate that will preserve the DR external 
competitiveness while allowing the poor to afford basic 
necessities 
 
- - Currency stabilization will be achieved through a prudent 
monetary and fiscal policy. The austerity programs that the 
government has initiated will guarantee the macroeconomic 
stability that has been achieved in the last 100 days over 
the remainder of the Fernandez administration 
 
- - The administration has adopted a comprehensive strategy 
to resolve the quasi fiscal deficit of the Central Bank which 
includes inverting the yield curve of the debt while applying 
new long term methods of creating positive yield. 
 
- - The administration has reduced the interest rate by half 
of the Central Bank certificates, from 59.61% to 24.46% 
 
- - In September a deflation of 1.13% occurred. The Central 
Bank reports that inflation for the month of November is 
expected to be )0.68%. 
 
- - The noticeable control of prices has caused international 
organization to revise their inflation estimates for 2004 
from 45% to 33% 
 
- - The Dominican Merchants Federation (FDC) reported that 
more than 2500 products have dropped in price including rice, 
beans, chicken, beef, pork, cod fish, plantain, eggs, bread, 
yucca, local yams, oil, and powdered milk 
 
- - The fall in prices translates to an increase in real 
salary, with the same amount of money a consumer can now buy 
more goods 
 
- -The government has initiated a new program &Eating is 
Fundamentalt8 (Comer es Primero) which will help families in 
extreme poverty by giving them a monthly allowance of   550 
pesos (USD 18.50)  worth of food. Recipients must agree to 
various conditions, such as ensuring that children attend 
school. Social Services (Gabinete Social), overseen by 
Vice-President Albuquerque has initiated a census of the 
country, to be carried out by private contractors, which will 
identify the 200,000 poorest families which will participate 
in the program. 
 
- -The reserves of the Central Bank have increased from a 
deficit of US$13.1 million to a surplus of US$176 million, 
allowing the country to live up to its short term 
international financial responsibilities. 
 
- - The Gross Domestic Product will have grown by 1.8% by the 
end of the year, in contrast to the IMF,s initial estimate 
of a 1% loss. This increase is due to the 3.6% growth that 
the country experienced in the last 100 days. 
 
- -The government will work to sustain the economic recovery 
and to create a new agreement with the IMF. To reach an 
agreement the government has initiated tax reforms beginning 
October 1 which include  the increase in the rate of VAT 
(ITBIS) from 12% to 16%, an increase in a luxury tax 
affecting alcohol and tobacco, inflation adjustments on the 
tax on gasoline, and reassessment the beneficiaries of gas 
and electricity subsidies 
- -   The government will also take on the following goals as 
part of an IMF agreement 
- - reform public financial institutions to improve the 
design and application of fiscal policies 
- - strengthen the Central Bank and the Superintendent of 
Banks with the goal of improving the application of monetary 
policy and the financial system 
- -improve the efficiency of the electric sector and assure 
its financial viability 
 
- - The government has entered into negotiations with the 
Paris Club with the goal of confirming the agreement started 
in April of 2004 to reprogram US$193 million of debt payment. 
 
- - New investments have been started in the tourism 
industry, the free trade zones, and in new infrastructure 
projects. 
 
- -The government has resolved the problem of liquid gas 
(cooking gas) supply shortage. The subsidy program for 
cooking gas has gained transparency and been limited in its 
scope resulting in a savings of RD$600 million for the 
government. 
 
Agriculture 
 
- - The government is concentrating on three areas of the 
farming and livestock sector: strengthening national 
production by increasing the selection to consumers while 
raising the quality and lowering the price of goods, 
rehabilitation of farming and livestock after hurricane 
Jeanne, and carrying out construction projects to repair 
damaged road and bridges. 
 
Health 
 
- - In an effort to rebuild the ailing health care sector, 
the government has purchased ambulances, repaired electrical 
generators, and created a program of inter-institutional 
technical assistance. 
 
Environment 
 
-- During the first 100 days the government planted 1,700,000 
trees, started to formulate policies regarding protected land 
and biodiversity with technical assistance from Germany. The 
Secretary of the Environment has ordered that the rock-ash be 
 
SIPDIS 
removed from the country 
 
Education 
 
- - New projects for renovating the country,s education 
system have been initiated which include technology centers 
in primary and secondary schools, a financing program for 
teachers to buy computers, development of a national 
education software, a program to train teachers in 
information technology, the creation of an education website 
and the development of a national bilingual education system 
encompassing pre-Kindergarten through high school. 
 
- - 4,400,000 text books have been distributed to elementary 
students, 50,000 backpacks with school supplies have been 
distributed to poor students, 20,000 desks have been 
distributed to schools around the country 
 
President Fernandez said  he recognizes that there are still 
many challenges ahead including strengthening legal 
institutions, fighting corruption, creating mechanism by 
which the law of civil service and administrative career can 
be applied to avoid the anarchy that occurs every four years 
when the entire government changes, and rehabilitating the 
diplomatic school. He concluded by saying that the two 
greatest threats to the future of the Dominican Republic were 
the electricity crisis and crime. He stated that the 
government has paid 3 billion pesos to address the collapse 
of the electric sector and that a strategy to resolve the 
problem is being developed in conjunction with the World 
Bank.  He made strong statements about his tough position on 
violence (\"a tough hand against crime\"), drug trafficking, 
and organized crime, although he gave no concrete examples of 
how this position would be enforced. 
 
2.  (U) Drafted by Michael Meigs, Tawnie McNeil. 
 
3. (U)  This piece and others in our series can be consulted 
at our SIPRNET site 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/santodomingo/  
along with extensive other material. 
 
 
 
HERTELL 
"
"23672","12/6/2004 17:19","04SANTODOMINGO6524","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 006524 
 
SIPDIS 
 
HHS FOR SECRETRAY THOMPSON; DEPT FOR G, OES, WHA, WHA/CAR, 
WHA/EPSC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TBIO, SOCI, EAID, DR 
SUBJECT: U.S. COMS\' HIV/AIDS CONFERENCE HIGHLIGHTS 
DISCRIMINATION AND STIGMA AND ELICITS NEW DOMINICAN 
COMMITMENT TO HIV/AIDS 
 
1.  Summary:  In a packed three days in early October, the 
U.S. Government\'s senior HIV/AIDS team and Caribbean-based 
U.S. Ambassadors, with the help of Dominican President Leonel 
Fernandez, his health team and the winners of an HIV/AIDS 
song contest for youth, threw the spotlight on HIV/AIDS in an 
effort to build awareness and to re-commit to treat and 
prevent the disease.  Ambassadors contributed and took home 
recommendations that will help HIV/AIDS programs in the 
region.  Suggestions for future COM regional conferences on 
AIDS included involving participant countries\' Ministries of 
Health in the proceedings.  The U.S. Government also signed 
an agreement for additional assistance to the Dominican 
Republic for HIV/AIDS work, and Ambassador Hans Hertell and 
U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) Tommy G. 
Thompson called on the Dominican Government to put in place a 
management and financial accountability structure that would 
enable the release of Global Fund monies already approved for 
the Dominican Republic.   President Fernandez agreed to have 
his AIDS advisor take care of this at once.  Surgeon General 
Richard Carmona, Global AIDS Coordinator Randall Tobias, and 
USAID Assistant Administrator for Global Health Anne Peterson 
visited AIDS clinics in Santo Domingo and, at the last-minute 
request of President Fernandez, also visited the country\'s 
only trauma hospital; Surgeon General Carmona offered to work 
within the U.S. Government to consider providing technical 
assistance and traumatology training to this overcrowded, 
badly organized, and equipment-poor hospital.  End summary. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
Third Annual Caribbean-based U.S. COMs HIV/AIDS Conference 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
2.  U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services Tommy 
Thompson, U.S. Global AIDS Coordinator Ambassador Randall 
Tobias, U.S. Surgeon General Richard Carmona, and USAID 
Assistant Administrator for Global Health Anne Peterson 
joined the U.S. Ambassadors in the Caribbean and some 200 
others in the Third Annual Caribbean Chiefs of Mission 
Conference on HIV/AIDS, hosted by Ambassador Hans Hertell on 
October 4-5.  Dominican President Leonel Fernandez and 
Dominican Health Minister Sabino Baez were present at the 
opening of the widely televised conference.  Fernandez 
stressed the need for a comprehensive policy aimed at 
prevention.  He noted that while local government statistics 
show the number of Dominicans living with HIV/AIDS to have 
decreased, the situation in Haiti is dire, as a reported 5.6 
percent of the adult population is living with the disease. 
Note:  HHS and USAID officials in Haiti the day before 
indicated that recent survey data showed the HIV prevalence 
rate for 2003 to be approximately three percent.  End note. 
Public Health Secretary Sabino Baez, for his speech, 
recounted USAID\'s assistance and stressed the importance of 
education.  He said he hoped to lower mortality rates 
associated with AIDS and create a greater social acceptance 
for those living with the disease.   U.S. speakers described 
the disease as a leading challenge of our time, emphasized 
the U.S. Government\'s commitment to combating it, and 
described U.S. policy. 
 
3.  Most of the conference was devoted to discussion amongst 
the nine U.S. Chiefs of Mission and Principal Officers and 
other U.S. participants.  Each Ambassador shared information 
on the projects underway in his or her country and the 
lessons learned.  They discussed four major HIV/AIDS issues 
in the Caribbean:  Haiti as a challenge, the impact on and by 
tourism, the economic cost of the pandemic, and the effect of 
migration.  Participants discussed the need for coordination 
among agencies, as more actors get involved in fighting AIDS. 
 They also addressed the need to focus on medicine 
procurement and management issues.  Ambassador to Jamaica Sue 
Cobb noted that in the three years following the first COM 
Conference in Haiti, there has been significant progress in 
the region.  Participants agreed that the COM Conferences are 
useful forums for keeping this issue in public view. 
Ambassador to the Bahamas, John Rood, offered to host the 
conference next year. 
 
4.  The conference program concluded with a mass-media 
campaign launch of this year\'s theme, discrimination and 
stigma, that also featured HIV/AIDS song contest winners and 
included a reception for a largely Dominican guest list 
hosted by Ambassador Hertell. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
Signing Ceremony for Increased HIV/AIDS Assistance for the DR 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
5.  On the margins of the conference, Ambassador Hertell and 
President Fernandez, along with Secretary Thompson and Dr. 
Carmona witnessed the signing of an amendment to the current 
U.S.-Dominican agreement for HIV/AIDS assistance.  The 
amendment increased U.S. Government assistance for HIV/AIDS 
work in the Dominican Republic by USD 13 million during the 
five-year strategic plan period of 2002-2007.  With this 
addition, the total USAID assistance for HIV/AIDS will reach 
$28 million. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
HHS Secretary Tommy Thompson Calls for Better DR Accounting 
to Release Global Fund Allocation 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
6.  In a bilateral call on President Fernandez and his 
HIV/AIDS team, U.S. HHS Secretary Tommy Thompson, in his 
capacity as Chairman of the Board of the Global Fund to Fight 
HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, noted that the Global 
Fund Board had approved a two year, $14 million grant to the 
Dominican Republic for HIV/AIDS programs, but that problems 
in setting up management and financial accountability on the 
Dominican side have long delayed the distribution of funds. 
Secretary Thompson asked that the President turn his 
 
SIPDIS 
attention to getting the proper mechanisms in place to ensure 
an appropriate degree of fiscal responsibility and 
accountability.   Thompson noted that a team from the Global 
Fund Secretariat in Geneva is scheduled to visit the 
Dominican Republic to re-examine the role of COPRESIDA. 
Note:  The problems with COPRESIDA\'s management of the grant 
during the Mejia Administration years recently led the Global 
Fund Secretariat to conclude an emergency bridge agreement 
with the Clinton Foundation instead, to procure 
anti-retroviral drugs (ARVS).  End note. 
 
7.  Fernandez reiterated his message from the conference that 
his administration is fully committed to fighting HIV/AIDS. 
He immediately directed Dr. Alberto Fiallo, director of the 
President\'s Council on AIDS, or \"COPRESIDA,\" to put in place 
the necessary financial accountability structure to enable 
release of the Global Fund allocation and to keep in touch 
with HHS and USAID staff.  Fiallo agreed. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
What the Dominican Republic Needs Most: Better Hospital 
Management 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
8.  Speaking more generally, Fernandez told the group that 
the most urgently needed health-related assistance in the 
Dominican Republic is guidance and training in hospital and 
healthcare management.  He said he would welcome training 
assistance from the United States, and suggested the 
possibility of both U.S.- and Dominican-based training for 
local healthcare workers.  He noted that just one trauma 
hospital exists in the entire country, and requested that 
Surgeon General Carmona and others visit it during their stay 
with an eye to seeing what assistance and training the United 
States might be able to offer the hospital.  They did visit, 
finding a hospital that was poorly organized, over-crowded, 
under-equipped, with inadequate sanitation.  The USAID 
mission in Santo Domingo is currently developing a scope of 
work in coordination with HHS to address some of the issues 
found during the trauma hospital site visit. 
 
----------------------- 
AIDS Patients Speak Out 
----------------------- 
 
9.  Also on the margins of the conference, AIDS Administrator 
Tobias, Surgeon General Carmona, and Assistant USAID 
Administrator Peterson, accompanied by their Dominican 
counterparts, visited several AIDS treatment sites, including 
a model AIDS wing in a public hospital and a private clinic. 
Members of an organization representing persons living with 
HIV/AIDS met with the Dominican and U.S. Government visitors 
at one stop.  They explained their outreach activities in 
rural communities on treatment and prevention, their concerns 
that HIV/AIDS was severely under-reported by the GODR, and 
the shortage of anti-retroviral drugs.   They described the 
life-and-death consequences of the shortage of ARVs. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
10.  The conference demonstrated strong U.S. Government 
interest and support for combating HIV/AIDS.  It focused 
President Fernandez\'s attention on HIV/AIDS at an early stage 
of his presidency, and helped make the disease a priority for 
his administration.  Frank talk from AIDS patients about the 
consequences of ARV shortages created some welcome future 
accountability for the new Dominican government, which has 
now promised greater attention to the needs of patients.  The 
U.S. Government\'s equally frank talk about the Dominicans\' 
management and financial accountability problems that blocked 
 disbursements from the Global Fund have since led to 
follow-up meetings to deal with the problem, and we are 
optimistic the GODR will put the right mechanisms in place 
soon.  As for the U.S. Chiefs of Missions, they left the 
conference newly energized and updated, and the pertinence of 
the dialogue led to a recommendation that the conference be 
held again next year.  End comment. 
KUBISKE 
"
"23728","12/7/2004 20:57","04SANTODOMINGO6564","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","04STATE239929","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 006564 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR OASIA/MDM:J. FRANCO 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, PM, EB/IFD/OMA:L. GALLAGHER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/29/2014 
TAGS: DR, EAID, EFIN, MARR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC:  TRANSPARENCY OF 
BUDGETS/MILITARY SPENDING 
 
REF: STATE 239929 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske.  Reason:  1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (SBU)  SUMMARY: The Dominican Republic,s military budget 
is determined in the national budget process overseen by the 
Office of the Budget, resulting in an annual national 
government budget bill considered and voted by Congress and 
signed and promulgated by the President.  The military budget 
is subject to audit by civilian authorities and by the audit 
office of the armed forces. The new president\'s appointments, 
his policy of austerity measures and his adamant call for 
\"zero tolerance\" for corruption are taken as policy 
guidelines by the Secretary of the Armed Forces Vadm Sigfrido 
Pared Perez.  Defense expenditures at a reported 0.4 percent 
of GDP will not be a priority for this administration. 
 
General Overview of Military Budgeting and Spending 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
2. (SBU)  Government budgeting has achieved limited 
improvements in transparency over the last five years.  In 
2003, the government set up an Integrated Financial 
Management System (SIGF) designed eventually to integrate all 
budgetary, financial, and public debt management of 
government spending under the Finance Ministry.  Several new 
draft law proposals are pending in the Congress that should 
further enhance good governance.  These potential laws would 
address budget, the Treasury, public borrowing, and 
government procurement. 
 
3. (SBU) The Dominican military\'s annual 2004 budget was 
approximately 5.2 billion Dominican pesos (about USD 180 
million at current rates).  It had sustained minimal growth 
during the previous 4 years.  Its primary function has been, 
and continues to be, to provide employment for the estimated 
42,000 personnel currently on the Armed Forces, rolls. 
Payroll and associated personnel benefits have accounted for 
the bulk of budget expenditures (between 88 to 91 percent 
depending on service branch) known locally as &carga fija8 
(fixed load expenses). 
 
4. (SBU)  Budget trends are likely to continue without a 
reduction in human resources.  Despite the military\'s request 
for a 2005 budget increase, the defense budget probably will 
not grow during this administration.  Newly elected President 
Leonel Fernandez has announced  plans for general austerity 
as part of an IMF standby program under negotiation, putting 
all institutions on notice of short funding until economic 
conditions improve significantly.  Reduction in the number of 
uniformed personnel is seen as politically difficult, in part 
because about 30 to 35 percent of the uniformed force is 
actually employed in civilian government offices or in the 
private sector, often as private residence guards, 
chauffeurs, and other personal service assistants.  Therefore 
the remaining discretionary portion of the budget leaves 
little for operational requirements and acquisition of 
supplies needed to maintain the Armed Forces.  Inflation and 
the currency fluctuation from early 2003 trough mid-2004 have 
further compounded the erosion of the military,s operational 
capabilities, forcing it to seek off-budget requests to 
conduct some of its day-to-day operations, delay payment of 
rations to soldiers, or postpone the payment of other 
mandated fringe benefits to personnel and materiel suppliers. 
 
 
A.  General Overview of Auditing Procedures 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
5. (SBU)  All Dominican institutions are technically subject 
to audit by the &Camara de Cuentas,8 a five-member 
independent civilian body attached to Congress.  The Camara 
de Cuentas reports to the Congress, presenting on the first 
ordinary legislature of a fiscal year an annual account of 
expenditures of the previous fiscal year.  In early 2004 
President Mejia signed and promulgated Public Law 10-04 
giving the Camara de Cuentas broad authority to look into any 
public institution,s finances.  Reports and examinations by 
the Camara are generally considered to be pro forma. 
 
6. (SBU) The \"Contraloria General de la Republic\" or 
Dominican General Accounting Office (DGAO) has the authority 
to audit any government office or operation and concentrates 
principally on cases of suspected fraud and abuse. For 
example, in April 2003 the DGAO delivered an audit of \"Plan 
Renove,\" a program to support procurement public transport 
vehicles to be used by transport union members; in November 
2004 the Attorney General of the new administration (in 
office since mid-August) lodged formal charges of fraud and 
embezzlement against 12 persons. The DGAO is currently 
auditing the administration of a financing agreement with the 
U.S. EXIMBANK approved in 2001 in the amount of approximately 
USD 10 million for the purchase of helicopters for the 
military.  As is the case for all foreign financing to 
official agencies creating government debt, the contract was 
approved by both the Senate and House.  The military 
leadership and the responsible office of the Presidency used 
a generally worded \"amendments\" clause in the agreement to 
increase the amount of the loan from USD 10 million to USD 76 
million, using certifications from the then presidents of the 
Senate and House, who did not refer the amended terms of 
contract to committee or to the full legislature for approval. 
 
7. (SBU) New Comptroller of the Armed Forces Rear Admiral 
Betances has a clear mandate from the Secretary of the Armed 
Forces, Vadm Sigfrido Pared Perez.  Betances is a formally 
trained financial manager/accountant who is highly regarded 
and knowledgeable about the budget submission process.  The 
Comptroller is charged with submitting the services, budgets 
and tracking their expenditures.  He has a team of internal 
auditors who work for him in the respective branches of the 
service.  They in turn are charged with tracking the 
expenditures of the respective services. In application of 
new policies of budgetary restraint, the Comptroller intends 
to prohibit discretionary purchases for sums that involve 
more than 2 million Dominican pesos (USD 75,000), subjecting 
these instead to prior approval from the Presidency and the 
Secretary of Defense.  Service chiefs have in the past had 
 
SIPDIS 
the autonomy to seek exterior financing without concurrence 
from the MOD for such acquisitions or expenditures, provided 
there was political support for such purchases. 
 
8. (SBU) The Dominican military,s budget is formulated 
annually in September by the respective services, which 
submit it in October to the Comptroller General of the Armed 
Forces.  The Comptroller,s office further compiles and 
submits the budget to the civilian-staffed Presidential 
Office of Budget Planning.  Negotiations follow before formal 
submission of the budget authorization and appropriations 
bill to the Congress in December or early January for 
approval, presidential signature, and publication in the 
Official Gazette.  While items for military pay and 
allowances are relatively easy to establish, the operations 
and maintenance portions of the respective service branch 
budgets are archaic and,  in the case of maintenance and 
operations expenditures, formulated without verification of 
the existence or operability of equipment. 
 
9. (C) Military expenditures are not audited on a routine 
basis, as there are no formal regulatory requirements 
requiring them or setting schedules for them. Past 
Comptrollers have only occasionally carried out special 
audits, and these have generally appeared to be motivated at 
least in part by political considerations or in-house 
rivalries -- as in cases when a given commander or staff 
leader has been targeted for misappropriation of public 
funds.  The results of these audits are not publicly 
available and weaknesses of the judicial system mean no one 
to date has been incarcerated or punished severely for 
abusing the public,s trust.  Transfer or dismissal from the 
service are the most severe sanctions employed. 
 
10. (SBU)  Treasury exercises ad hoc controls on military 
spending through the mechanism of the period release of funds 
to military components.  Each service component commander 
must request allocations or checks for payment, a form of 
control for the outflows of funds from the Treasury. 
 
11. (SBU) The nerve center for military finances is the 
office of the Director of Logistics (J-4), which serves more 
as a paymaster and disbursement office than as an office for 
logistics planning and policy making.  Its director has been 
at the helm for more than ten years, apparently immune from 
politics because of his specialized expertise. 
 
B.  The Military Budget and On-Budget and Off-Budget Revenue 
and Expenses 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
12. (C) During the last decade, major military equipment 
acquisitions have not appeared in the military,s budget. 
This changes with the 2005 budget just submitted to Congress, 
which includes specific line items for acquisition of vessels 
(two coast guard vessels and reconstruction of six more, for 
a total of aprox USD 5.7 million) and aircraft and associated 
training (not detailed, for approx USD 23.9 million). 
Financing for these acquisitions is identified as coming from 
\"external resources\" (loans).  Any such transaction creating 
government endebtedness must be authorized by the executive 
(in practice, either the Technical Secretary of the 
Presidency or the Minister of Finance) and approved by vote 
of both the Senate and the House of Representatives. 
Justification and planning for such acquisitions has been 
poor and it is widely believed that intermediaries and 
approving officials receive under-the-table commissions. 
13. (SBU) Off-budget requests are the end-around for 
resolving budget shortfalls, generally to secure funds for 
special activities or operational needs. For example, during 
a two-month troop buildup on the Dominican/Haitian border 
during the Haitian domestic crisis of the spring 2004, the 
Presidency provided operational funds from the  President,s 
discretionary account, known internally as the &14018 
account.  The funding covered for fuel, maintenance and 
rations. Another  example of off-budget financing from other 
parts of the government was the payment of 2,000 excess Air 
Force personnel shorted pay due to the service,s lack of 
funds at the end of the fiscal year. 
14. (SBU)  Military leaders resort to canvassing the private 
sector for donations when other methods fall short. 
Historically, vendors and wealthy private sector businessmen 
who need favors from the military have provided funds for 
special needs, without the expectation of repayment.  One 
recent example was the return from Iraq of the batallion of 
302 Dominican soldiers. The decision was taken abruptly to 
curtail them by two months from their commitment in order to 
get them home by the date of the mid-May presidential 
election.  When it became evident that U.S. strategic airlift 
would not be available in time to meet that deadline, the 
President persuaded Air Europa, a major operator in Dominican 
tourism, to fly the troops back from Spain, presumably at no 
charge. 
 
15. (SBU) Military and Police budgets are independent of one 
another.  Law enforcement efforts and public safety fall 
under the Secretariat of Interior and Police.  Its budget of 
roughly USD 130 million is completely independent of the 
military budget. 
 
The Military Component of the National Budget 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
16. (SBU) As noted above, on-budget military expenditures 
amount to approximately 0.4 pct of GDP and consist for the 
most part of a \"jobs program\" for the 42,000 members of the 
Armed Forces.  The 5.2 billion peso budget represents 
approximately 6.3 percent of the central government current 
operating budget of 82 billion, or 4.8 percent of the 
non-financial public sector budget (current   capital 
expenditure).  The fiscal year runs from January 1 to 
December 31; the administration proposes a budget to 
Congress, generally in December, for general debate.  Both 
houses must pass the annual Budget Law, which becomes law 
when it is signed by the President and published in the 
Official Gazette. 
 
KUBISKE 
"
"23859","12/9/2004 20:18","04SANTODOMINGO6609","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO6292","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 006609 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, WHA/USOAS, EB/TPP/BTA, 
EB/IFD/OMA;NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON;LABOR FOR ILAB; 
USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD; TREASURY FOR OASIA-LCARTER 
STATE PASS USTR FOR VARGO, RYCKMAN, MALITO, CRONIN 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, ETRD, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN VOTE TO REPEAL PROTECTIONIST TAX - 
PYRRHIC VICTORY? 
 
REF: A. SANTO DOMINGO 6292 
 
     B. FAX TO STATE/WHA/CAR 
     C. TREASURY/OASIA 
     D. USTR 12/3/04 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  The Dominican Senate achieved a 
breakthrough of sorts on December 7 with a preliminary vote 
(19 to 1) in favor of repealing a protectionist 25 percent 
tax on beverages containing imported high fructose corn 
syrup, which for months has been a barrier to Dominican 
participation in the Central American Free Trade Agreement 
(CAFTA).  The bill goes to a special Senate committee and 
must be subject to a final vote scheduled for December 15. 
It must then be approved by the Chamber of Deputies and the 
President. The measure includes extensive tax breaks for the 
sugar industry and other businesses, estimated by the 
administration at USD 150 million -- which would complicate 
efforts to reach a new IMF agreement.  End summary. 
 
A Vote to Repeal -- and More 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
2. (SBU) The Dominican Senate on December 7 voted on a first 
preliminary reading to repeal a protectionist 25 percent tax 
on beverages containing imported high fructose corn syrup, a 
measure inserted in late September into an otherwise 
necessary tax package.  (The USG has refrained from 
recommending to Congress that the Dominican republic be a 
member of CAFTA as long as the 25 percent tax remains in 
effect.) The vote took place more than two months after 
President Leonel Fernandez submitted draft repeal 
legislation.  It was preceded by increasingly tense 
negotiations among the 29 senators (of 32) who belong to the 
main opposition PRD.  The Senate convened for a protracted 
afternoon and evening session to consider the repeal. 
 
3. (SBU) Before the vote, Senate President Andres Bautista -- 
a proponent of repeal -- angrily criticized senators for 
repeatedly blocking the repeal and packing the bill with 
concessions to special interests.  Bautista had favored 
putting the proposed concessions into a separate bill.  \"I 
have convoked four Senate sessions to consider this bill and 
have been boycotted.  Now that it\'s on today\'s agenda, a new 
bill is introduced.\" The new version included the repeal of 
the tax, but also significant tax breaks for Dominican 
business.  The ultimate objective of the bill, he asserted, 
was in fact to prevent the repeal of the 25 percent tax and 
ultimately to block approval of CAFTA.  \"We understand some 
senators took naive positions, some had economic motives and 
others were pushed by the intervention of sectors outside the 
Senate.\"  Another senator speculated to us Bautista 
considered that his personal authority had been challenged 
and weakened in the weeks-long standoff. 
 
4. (SBU) Bautista declared the session to be concluded and 
left the Senate chamber, followed by about eight other 
senators \"in solidarity\" with the president.  Senate Vice 
President Cesar Matias took the chair and the 20 who remained 
voted to resume the session. They voted 19-1 to pass the 
bill.  The sole senator from Fernandez\'s Dominican Liberation 
Party (PLD), Jose Tomas Perez, was absent from the chamber. 
Bautista told us the next day that he considered his vice 
president\'s action to be a violation of Senate procedure, but 
another key senator said that the proceedings were in 
accordance with the rules. 
 
Key Provisions 
-------------- 
5. (U) Article 1 of the bill (Ref B draft text) repeals the 
specific provisions of the September 28 law creating the 25 
percent tax on fructose-sweetened drinks and refreshments. 
The remaining articles define compensatory measures in the 
form of changes to Dominican tax laws. 
 
6. (U) Agricultural enterprises including the sugar sector 
are allowed to offset without limit from their tax 
liabilities any amount spent on repair, maintenance or 
improvement of capital goods.  The sugar sector is allowed to 
deduct from tax obligations all amounts paid as VAT to its 
suppliers, with the notation in the preamble that sales of 
sugar are not subject to VAT.  The measure removes capital 
goods imports from the scope of the current ten percent tax 
on imports (disguised as an \"exchange charge\" and proposed 
for an increase to thirteen percent).  Changes to tax 
incentives for investments in businesses near the Haitian 
border (Article 6, Ref B) will do little to offset the 
revenue losses.  A concluding article repeals a series of 
articles and laws identified by dates and references and not 
further explained, including one that is applicable to 
alcoholic beverages. 
 
7. (SBU) The approved text varies only minimally from the 
working draft faxed to Washington  (Ref B).  Language is 
added to Article 5 specifically emphasizing favorable 
treatment for the sugar sector.  It now reads, in our 
informal translation: 
 
\"All imports of capital goods in general, and inputs to the 
sugar industry, including but not limited to machinery, 
equipment and furniture; as well as replacements and parts 
(los repuestos, partes y piezas) for machines and equipment 
for industry, into the Dominican Republic shall be exempt 
from payment of the foreign currency exchange commission or 
any other charge of similar nature which has been 
established, or may be established in the future, by the 
Monetary Board or any other State institution or agency.\" 
 
Fiscal Impact 
------------- 
 
8. (U) Internal Revenue Director Juan Hernandez told the 
press after a meeting with the influential Council of 
Entrepreneurs (CONEP) that the bill would enact tax cuts 
amounting to 4.5 billion pesos (approximately USD 150 
million), obliging a revision of the 2005 government budget 
(the passage of which is one of several pre-conditions for 
approval of the IMF standby arrangement).  \"Everyone has 
called the budget optimistic already, since the tax 
collection authorities will have to make an extra effort to 
meet the objectives -- and if in addition they enact tax 
cuts, this will create problems with the agreement we\'ve 
already struck with the IMF.\"  Hernandez said that the 
measures would create \"chaos\" in tax administration. 
 
Next Steps to Repeal 
-------------------- 
 
9. (SBU) Some of the proponents of the free trade agreement 
are talking of seeking on December 15 simply to pass instead 
the repeal bill essentially as proposed by President 
Fernandez, without the tax concessions.  If the committee 
finishes its work as expeditiously as promised and if the 
Senate approves the bill on December 15, the measure would 
then pass to the lower house of Congress, where Finance 
Committee chairman Marino Collante previously assured us that 
a solid majority (at least 90 out of 150)favors the repeal. 
Timing is uncertain, and there is no schedule announced as 
yet for the holiday recess.  Once approved by the House, the 
measure would go to the President for signature and 
promulgation -- or veto.  Under the Constitution the 
President may return a entire bill to Congress with his 
\"observations,\" in which case it dies unless overidden wthin 
eight days by a two-thirds vote in each houses. The current 
Congressional session has been extended until January 12; the 
new session will not begin until February 27. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
10. (SBU) Many of the senators feel an obligation to protect 
the domestic sugar industry, as historically important and a 
provider of employment -- and because of the wealth and 
influence of the industry owners, expressed through many 
years of personal connections, favors and contributions overt 
and under the table.  Sugar and fertilizer interests have run 
an aggressive and mendacious public campaign since signature 
of CAFTA on August 5.  The press and politicians bristled 
with indignation and feigned patriotic fervor at the message 
from the Ambassador, the Embassy and senior USG officials 
that the Dominican Republic was setting itself up for 
exclusion from CAFTA.  All the legislators are now unhappily 
aware that the U.S. position is firm. We believe the votes 
are there for repeal of the tax in both houses of the 
Dominican Congress.  There is no sign that there is 
sufficient principle or indignation among legislators to 
constitute majority willing to stiff the sugar sector instead 
of buying it off.  The question is how many concessions the 
sugar sector and agricultural interests will be able to exact. 
 
11. (SBU) One great concern is the potential fiscal impact of 
compensatory measures - the bill lifts the 10 percent 
\"exchange charge\" on a category of expensive imports, while 
tilting tax treatment sharply in favor of the sugar industry 
(the Association of Manufacturers has already clamored for 
similar, \"equitable treatment.\") The Fernandez administration 
government and the Congress must be sure that whatever 
solution emerges takes into account the country\'s other 
interests, especially the pressing need for the agreement 
with the IMF.  By seeking to solve one impasse with 
concessions to agricultural producers and sugar barons, the 
Dominican Congress could possibly be setting up another 
impasse, equally dangerous,with the International Monetary 
Fund. 
KUBISKE 
"
"24056","12/14/2004 17:20","04SANTODOMINGO6656","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO6472","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 006656 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EAP/CM, EAP/TC; STATE PASS 
AIT/W; EB/TPP/BTA, EB/IFD/OMA; USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD; 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, ETRD, EINV, PINR, CH, TW, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: PRC REPRESENTATIVE PUSHES 
RECOGNITION 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 6472 
 
1. (SBU) During a courtesy call December 10, the head of the 
Santo Domingo 
Commercial Development Office of the People\'s Republic of 
China Cai Weiquan 
told Charge Kubiske that his purpose in the Dominican 
Republic is to encourage it to switch diplomatic recognition, 
recognizing Beijing instead of Taipei.  PRC investment in the 
Dominican Republic, he acknowledged, depended on it.  So, 
far, he said, the Dominican Government so far has given no 
indication that it will switch recognition; the PRC reps have 
been told only that authorities of the current Dominican 
administration are \"thinking about\" the proposal.  Cai hoped 
we could help convince the Dominicans on recognition.  Charge 
replied that this was matter between the PRC and the 
Dominican Republic. 
 
2. (SBU) Cai arrived six months ago as the commercial rep and 
has already arranged visits by three PRC 
commercial/investment delegations.  He has also promoted 
travel by Dominican politicians and businesspersons to China, 
including a trip by 10 Dominican 
senators (reftel). 
 
3. (SBU) Cai cited two obstacles to developing a larger 
relationship with the 
Dominican Republic: 
 
-- Lack of information among Dominicans about today\'s China 
-- now opening up 
to the world -- and about the realities of globalization and 
free trade; and 
 
-- The absence of diplomatic relations, which is preventing 
the development of 
a legal framework to facilitate trade and investment. 
 
4. (SBU) Cai noted that trade between China and the Dominican 
Republic is 
unbalanced in favor of China.  He claimed not to be an 
economist, nor to be 
current on details of investment projects cited reftel. 
These include 
negotiations by a Chinese firm to take over the Canadian 
mining enterprise 
Falconbridge including its Dominican affiliate and about 
other Chinese bids to 
purchase a 50 percent share in the Caucedo container port. 
 
5. (SBU) The PRC commercial office in Santo Domingo has a 
staff of three PRC 
citizens and two local hires, Cai said. 
 
6. (SBU) Comment:  This conversation did not change our 
recent analysis 
(reftel) of the PRC\'s charm offensive here or of the 
Dominicans\' growing but 
still noncommittal interest in what China has to offer.  End 
comment. 
 
7. (SBU) Bio data:  Cai Weiquan, a career diplomat of tbe PRC 
foreign ministry, 
served previously in Mexico, Peru, and Ecuador.  He has a 
master\'s degree in 
international economics and political affairs from a Mexican 
university and an 
undergraduate degree in political science in China.  He 
speaks excellent 
Spanish, but claims to speak \"not much English.\"  From Fujian 
province, Cai now 
has family in Beijing. 
KUBISKE 
"
"24177","12/16/2004 11:15","04SANTODOMINGO6699","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY","04SANTODOMINGO6609","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 006699 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, WHA/USOAS, EB/TPP/BTA, 
EB/IFD/OMA;NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON;LABOR FOR ILAB; 
USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD; TREASURY FOR OASIA; USDA FOR FAS 
(SHEIKH, GRUNENBAUM);STATE PASS USTR FOR VARGO, RYCKMAN, 
MALITO, CRONIN 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, PREL, ETRD, EFIN, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN STANDOFF ON REPEAL OF PROTECTIONIST TAX 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 6609 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  President Fernandez on December 14 implied 
he would veto a bill to repeal a the protectionist 25% tax on 
fructose-sweetened beverages if the Dominican Senate does not 
remove all of the \"compensatory\" tax breaks for agribusiness 
and industry that have been added to the original draft 
submitted by the executive.  Fernandez warned that the 
country cannot not afford to lose either the free trade 
agreement with the United States and Central America (CAFTA) 
or to disrupt the agreed terms for a new IMF standby.   The 
senators preparing the legislation have asserted to the 
Embassy that the bill with slightly modified tax breaks 
represents the \"last chance\" to repeal the 25% tax and keep 
the Dominican Republic in CAFTA.  The senate special 
commission conducted lengthy meetings today with 
administration fiscal officials and business interests; they 
have adjourned after deciding to appoint a subcommittee to 
negotiate with the administration and other interests. There 
will be no vote today, December 15, and it is not clear when 
a text will be ready for consideration by the general Senate. 
 End summary. 
 
Against Tax Breaks: President Fernandez and the IMF 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
2. (SBU) President Fernandez in public remarks December 14 
strongly reiterated his support for CAFTA and warned that 
\"compensatory\" tax breaks that have been added to a bill to 
repeal a protectionist 25% tax on fructose-sweetened 
beverages must be removed to gain his approval of the final 
legislation.  He said that the tax breaks place special 
interests above the national interest, which, he asserted, \"I 
will not permit.\"  As an example, he cited a proposed 
exemption from a 10% foreign exchange surcharge of capital 
goods for all domestic industries.  Fernandez emphasized that 
the 25% tax must be removed to clear the way for ratification 
of the Dominican Republic\'s free trade agreement with the 
United States and Central American countries(CAFTA).  He 
reminded the press that the country sends 80% of its exports 
to the United States and cannot afford to stay out of CAFTA. 
Congress must repeal the 25% tax to ensure Dominican 
participation in CAFTA, he said. 
 
3. (SBU) Internal Revenue Director General Juan Hernandez and 
Customs Director General Miguel Cocco met with key senators, 
including Senate President Andres Bautista (PRD), on December 
15 for three hours, seeking to iron out the differences.  A 
close advisor to Hernandez said the government was sticking 
to its guns:  tax repeal yes, tax breaks no.  Cocco is 
advocating that compensation for industry should be dealt 
with separately, and perhaps later. Senate president Bautista 
told Charge Kubiske late on December 14 that he needed to 
work with the government to find out the limits of how much 
the bill could offer in tax breaks without compromising IMF 
targets. 
 
4. (SBU) On December 13-14 IMF representative Ousmene 
Mandieng  publicly opposed the \"compensatory\" tax breaks, 
which, he said, would result in an unacceptable loss of 
revenue to the government.  Mandieng told us on December 15 
that anything causing deviation from agreed fiscal targets 
means trouble for the tentatively agreed IMF standby 
agreement.  He said the bill submitted last week (reftel) 
included such wide-open tax exemptions that it it was 
impossible to quantify the fiscal impact.  If revisions to 
the bill result in measures with calculable fiscal costs, the 
Dominicans will have to identify other measures to offset the 
fiscal impact.  He said that the financing gap projected for 
2005 for the non-financial public sector of 0.7 percent of 
GDP is already a problem and expressed skepticism that 
funding offsets could be found.  Mandieng commented that the 
IMF does not renegotiate its technical agreements or 
micromanage governments. 
 
For Tax Breaks:  Senate and Business 
------------------------------------ 
 
5. (SBU) Embassy officers met December 14 with Senator Juan 
Morales (PRD), chairman of the special committee considering 
the tax repeal bill, and committee members Senator Alejandro 
Santos (PRD) and Angel Perez (PRD).  The senators spoke with 
one voice:  the Senate had failed four times to pass the 
government\'s original bill, because many senators have 
obligations or links to the traditionally powerful sugar 
industry.  Only with \"compensating\" tax breaks would a 
majority of Senators vote to repeal the 25 percent tax 
enacted in September.  The repeal bill including the tax 
breaks, which passed a first reading March 7, was designed to 
help the sugar sector and other industries prepare to compete 
effectively in a free trade environment.  The senators shared 
a calculation of the fiscal impact of the tax exonerations on 
imports of capital equipment, prepared by former Technical 
Secretary of the Presidency Carlos Despradel, of RD $831.5 
 
SIPDIS 
million (US $28 million) per year -- not a showstopper, in 
their view.  Senator Santos, who also chairs the Senate\'s 
industry and trade committee, subsequently told the press 
that the IMF representative\'s criticism of the bill had been 
\"disrespectful and precipitate.\" 
 
6. (SBU) The senators December 14 outlined proposed revisions 
to the draft bill (previously faxed to State, Treasury, and 
USTR) to mitigate the fiscal impact while leveling the 
playing field for Dominican businesses: 
 
-- In Article 5, the exemption from the 10% foreign exchange 
surcharge on imports (set to rise to 13% in 2005) would be 
limited to machines, equipment, and replacement parts for 
industry; the application to \"inputs for the sugar industry\" 
would be deleted as open to abuse.  This \"inputs\" provision 
had provoked revenue chief Hernandez\'s recent off-the-cuff 
estimate of annual revenue losses of RD $4.5 billion (US $158 
million).  The bill\'s author, Senator Ramon Alburquerque 
(PRD), has argued that Article 5 as a whole will maintain 
incentives for investors, in competition with alternative 
foreign destinations.  The exchange surcharge mechanism, 
voted by the Monetary Board instead of approved by Congress, 
is being challenged in the courts as unconstitutional. 
 
-- In Article 4, Paragraph IV, the compensation for 
value-added (ITBIS) paid to suppliers would not be automatic 
(the government deems this to be unworkable), but the law 
would require the government to adjudicate it and deliver the 
accounting two monoths after the deposit of ITBIS (VAT). 
Business interests maintain that the government is in arrears 
on these reimbursements to the tune of RD $1.2 billion (US 
$42 million).  Except for the reduction of a considerable 
\"float\" in retained payments, the proposed improvement in 
administration of existing tax law would be essentially 
revenue-neutral for the government, but would reduce costs to 
business. 
 
-- In Article 2, sub-para 2.1., the cap of 5 percent of 
assets on deductions for capital depreciation and 
improvements in agroindustry would be removed.  This, they 
said, would move in the direction of establishing a level 
playing field in CAFTA for Dominican businesses, since 
Central American counterparts have no limits on such 
deductions.  Senator Alburquerque has stated that this 
provision would benefit thousands of small and medium sugar 
growers (\"colonos\"), not just \"three or four rich families.\" 
 
7. (SBU) The senators emphasized their desire to level the 
playing field.  They displayed a chart, reflecting business 
sentiment, comparing the tax levels businesses pay in the 
production process in the Dominican Republic and the five 
Central American nations.  Total taxes on production 
(including VAT), import duties on machinery, and foreign 
exchange surcharges), according to this analysis:  Dominican 
Republic 31 percent, Costa Rica 1 percent, Guatemala 12 
percent, El Salvador 13 percent, Nicaragua 15 percent, and 
Honduras 2 percent. 
 
8. (SBU) Business associations, previously divided on the 
repeal of the 25% tax (sugar sector against, free zone 
exporters in favor) have begun to converge behind the current 
package of repeal plus compensation.  The prestigious 
National Associaion of Private Enterprise (CONEP) and 
Association of Industries of the Dominican Republic (AIRD) 
have both issued supportive statements in recent days, as has 
the country\'s largest sugar exporter, Central Romana. 
However, the Chamber of Commerce and Production of Santiago 
-- the nation\'s second largest city, which depends on 
free-zone manufacturing for export -- criticized the 
controversy over repeal of the 25% tax as \"lamentable, 
inopportune, and counterproductive.\" 
 
Next Steps 
---------- 
 
9. (SBU) After a long day of meetings with fiscal authorities 
and businesses, the Senate commission appointed a 
subcommittee and adjourned. The private sector leaders intend 
to meet with President Fernandez.  The outcome of these 
various engagements, brokered as possible by the subcommtiee 
will determine the timing of a Senate special committee 
meetings and the session of the full Senate to consider the 
bill, and subsequent consideration by the Chamber of Deputies 
(lower house of Congress). 
 
10. (SBU) Chamber of Deputies president Alfredo Pacheco (PRD) 
told Charge Kubiske early on December 15 that he expected the 
obstacles to removal of the 25 percent tax to be resolved 
that day, even though the actual voting process in both 
houses would take longer.  Chamber finance committee chairman 
Marino Collante (PRSC) said to us December 14 that once the 
Senate approves the repeal bill, he could move it though his 
committee to the Chamber floor in 2-3 days.  He, Pacheco, and 
a solid majority of the deputies favor repeal.  Collante said 
that they would have to consider the fiscal impact of the 
\"compensation,\" and he would prefer to omit it from the bill. 
 But if the impact is \"mild,\" he believes the measure will be 
approved.  Senate president Bautista commented that he hopes 
to achieve final legislative approval by December 24; 
Congress will adjourn January 12, but could be called back 
into special sesion by the President. 
 
11. (SBU) In the event the Chamber of Deputies amends the 
bill as passed by the Senate, the modified bill would have to 
go back to the Senate for its approval of the changes, 
according to Article 40 of the Dominican Constitution.  Then 
the approved bill would go to President Fernandez for 
approval. 
KUBISKE 
"
"24289","12/17/2004 22:07","04SANTODOMINGO6734","Embassy Santo Domingo","CONFIDENTIAL","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 006734 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/USOAS 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/17/2009 
TAGS: PREL, DR, HA 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC ON OAS SYG CANDIDATE 
 
REF: A. AMB. FOLEY-IRVING E-MAIL 12/14/04 
 
     B. GOMEZ BERGES - CENTO E-MAIL 12/10/04 
     C. SAN SALVADOR 3551 (NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske for Reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
1. (C) Summary:  Political party leader (and former foreign 
minister) Victor Gomez Berges told Charge Kubiske December 15 
that he is interested in being considered as an alternate 
candidate for the OAS Secretary General job in the event the 
Central Americans are unable to reach a consensus.  Gomez 
Berges has been traveling to solicit support of regional 
governments.  The MFA informed us December 17 that the 
Dominican Government is in the process of deciding its 
position -- which is likely to be close to that of the United 
States. The MFA did not offer any support for Gomez Berges. 
Charge reiterated the U.S. position.  End summary. 
 
Visits in Santo Domingo, Port au Prince 
--------------------------------------- 
 
2. (C) Political party leader Victor Gomez Berges, 
accompanied by coffee magnate and civic leader Rafael 
Perello, visited Charge Kubiske December 15 to present 
himself for U.S. consideration as an alternative for OAS 
Secretary General, in the event the Central Americans are 
 
SIPDIS 
unable to reach consensus on a regional candidate. Gomez 
Berges mentioned that he had just come from Port au Prince 
where he had called on Ambassador Foley in the company of 
Haitian Prime Minister Gerard LaTortue (Ref A) and on 
President Alexandre.  Gomez Berges had had recent contact 
with other regional heads of state and had requested a 
meeting with USOAS Permanent Representative Maisto (Ref B). 
 
3. (C) Charge conveyed that we were hoping for a consensus 
Central American candidate, preferably a former president or 
other elected leader with broad political experience. 
 
4. (C) Gomez Berges said he understood the U.S. position. 
However, he commented, most former presidents in Latin 
America were tainted by corruption and he himself was a 
better representative of all the values the OAS stands for. 
The next OAS Secretary General would have to be above 
reproach.  The Dominican Republic has no conflicts with any 
of its neighbors, he noted, and he has consistently been in 
tune with U.S. policies in the region.  He said he had deep 
knowledge of Haiti, which would equip him well to lead the 
OAS stabilization efforts there. 
 
5. (C) Gomez Berges said he had been in touch with the 
presidents of Guatemala, Honduras, and Panama and with the 
Costa Rican foreign minister, and asserted that all had 
expressed reservations about the Flores candidacy.  Honduran 
President Maduro had ruled out supporting Flores, he said, 
because of the Honduran public\'s indignation over a failure 
by Flores to fulfill terms of a border agreement. 
 
6. (C) Charge asked where else the Dominican would be 
traveling, and he outlined plans for visits to at least 5 of 
the 14 OAS member states in the Caribbean.  He has already 
met with Trinidad and Tobago Prime Minister Manning (at the 
CCAA conference in Miami) and will next visit Jamaican Prime 
Minister Patterson. 
 
Dominican Government\'s Position 
------------------------------- 
 
7. (C) Gomez Berges said that before starting his travels he 
had checked with President Fernandez, who had \"not objected.\" 
 Deputy Foreign Minister Alejandra Liriano told the Charge on 
December 17 that the Dominican Government position remains as 
before:  supporting a Central American consensus candidate. 
MFA UN/OAS division chief Michelle Cohen told another Embassy 
officer the same day that the position was still being 
decided, but would be \"not far from yours.\"  She assured us 
the authorities were not considering any Dominican candidate. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
8. (C) Gomez Berges (Social Christian Reformist Party - PRSC) 
has a more conservative political orientation than President 
Fernandez (Dominican Liberation Party - PLD).  He is 
associated with the formally democratic but sporadically 
repressive \"12 years\" of the late President Balaguer 
(1982-1994).  Under these circumstances, it is extremely 
unlikely Gomez Berges can gain the support of his nation\'s 
government for his candidacy. 
 
Biographic Data 
--------------- 
 
9. (U) Gomez Berges served as foreign minister, 1972-76, and 
held four other ministerial portfolios (interior, education, 
finance, industry/trade) from 1965-78.  In 1975, Costa Rica 
and Mexico put forward his name as an option for OAS 
secretary general; Balaguer refused to support his bid, 
 
SIPDIS 
according to Gomez Berges, and he fell one vote short of 
being elected.  He served as a senator, 1978-82, and as 
ambassador successively to the Vatican, Greece, Cyprus, 
Argentina, and Paraguay in the 1980s and 1990s.  He headed 
the state-owned Dominican Electricity Corporation (1988-90) 
and Industrial Development Corporation (1994-96), and served 
in the Central American Parliament (2000-04).  A senior 
leader of the Social Christian Reformist Party (PRSC), the 
third-ranked Dominican political party, Gomez Berges served 
as a campaign adviser to former presidential candidate 
Eduardo Estrella in the 2004 election.  Gomez Berges is also 
a lawyer, university professor, business consultant, writer, 
and news commentator. 
KUBISKE 
"
"24373","12/20/2004 18:10","04SANTODOMINGO6752","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04STATE245841|04STATE259427","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SANTO DOMINGO 006752 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR S/CT JKINCANNON AND KMCCUTCHAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER, ASEC 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: 2004 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT 
 
REF: A. STATE 245841 
     B. STATE 259427 
 
1.  (U)  SUMMARY.  There were no terrorist attacks or known 
terrorism related activities in the Dominican Republic during 
calendar year 2004.  The GODR continues to work closely with 
the USG and others in the fight on global terrorism.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
2.  (U)  The Dominican Republic was not covered in the 2003 
Patterns of Global Terrorism Report.  Per reftels, Embassy 
Santo Domingo submits the following responses to 
applicable/appropriate questions as keyed to paragraph 15 in 
reftel a. 
 
A) Support for the global coalition against terrorism, 
including bilateral and multilateral efforts.  This could 
include examples of effective coalition, joint, or 
coordinated activity, including donor coordination/provision 
of support that significantly enhanced CT capacity. 
 
-- The GODR,s most significant contribution to the global 
coalition against terrorism was its contribution of Dominican 
troops to the Coalition forces in Iraq.  From September 2003 
through May 2004, the GODR had approximately 300 soldiers 
stationed in Iraq as part of a Spanish led brigade.  The 
troops returned to the Dominican Republic two and a half 
months earlier than expected due to logistical and political 
pressures. 
 
-- Additionally, the GODR has fully cooperated with USG and 
UN requests to search their banks for assets held under the 
names of known terrorists.  No accounts of this type have 
been found.  The 
Superintendent of Banks has headed the GODR\'s effort to 
ensure that banks, searches are conducted in a timely manner. 
 
B) Host nation counterterrorism actions, including its 
cooperation with the US both bilaterally and with the global 
coalition against terrorism. Significant actions in any (and 
all) of the following areas should be addressed, as 
appropriate: diplomatic, law enforcement, intelligence, 
financial, public diplomacy, and military. A particular focus 
should be placed on instances where the US asked for CT 
cooperation aimed at preventing attacks and protecting US 
persons or interests or assistance in response to attacks 
against US persons or interests.  This should include the 
extent to which the government is cooperating with the USG in 
apprehending, convicting, and punishing the individual(s) 
responsible for such attacks and the extent to which the 
government is cooperating in preventing future acts of 
terrorism against US persons or interests.  Diplomatic 
efforts should include steps to ratify CT-related UN 
conventions.  Financial efforts should include the extent of 
the host country\'s ability and efforts to meet the 
requirements of UNSCRs on terrorist financing. 
 
-- There have been no specific instances in which the USG has 
asked the GODR for CT cooperation in preventing definitively 
known terrorist attacks and protecting US persons or 
interests in the Dominican Republic nor have there been any 
ongoing legal actions against alleged terrorist or terrorist 
organizations in the Dominican Republic.  General cooperation 
in law enforcement, diplomatic, financial, public diplomacy 
and military issues is strong.  Intelligence gathering by the 
GODR is weak; nevertheless, should the USG ask for assistance 
the GODR intelligence community would do its best to provide 
it. 
 
C) Host nation law enforcement, intelligence/security 
service, and military actions taken against Al-Qaida or other 
terrorist groups; actions to track, block or seize terrorist 
assets; enactment of new pertinent counterterrorism laws, 
executive orders or regulatory action; making notable 
contributions under UN or multilateral auspices; and/or 
giving information or other assistance to countries 
investigation terrorist incidents or bringing terrorists to 
justice.  Discuss any success with a rewards program aimed at 
bringing terrorists to justice. 
 
--  An anti-terrorism law is currently in committee in the 
Dominican Congress.  The expectation is that it will be 
passed and go into effect in late 2005.  When passed it will 
raise the severity of punishment for those convicted of 
terrorist related crimes. 
 
D)  Response of the judicial system to acts of international 
terrorism and/or significant acts of domestic terrorism 
during 2004, including any host government prosecutions 
relating to terrorism.  Did the host country extradite or 
request the extradition of suspected terrorists for 
prosecution during the year?  Particular attention should be 
given to host government responses to US requests for 
extradition or assistance in terrorist cases.  Describe any 
major impediments to host government prosecution and/or 
extradition of suspected terrorists. 
--  There are no pending cases relating to international or 
domestic terrorism in the Dominican judicial system.  The 
GODR did not extradite or request the extradition of 
suspected terrorists during 2004.  The GODR and the USG have 
a strong extradition relationship.  In 2004, more fugitives 
(26) were extradited to the United States than in any 
previous calendar year.  If the USG were to request the 
extradition of a fugitive charged with terrorism related 
crimes, the GODR would likely comply with the request. 
 
E) We are also interested in law enforcement capabilities. 
Specifically, does the jurisdiction have the authority to 
intercept wire, oral and electronic communications?  What are 
the limitations?  Can law enforcement authorities initiate 
surveillance and investigation of suspected 
terrorists/terrorist facilitators based on intelligence 
information?  Can such information be used as evidence in 
court?  Who has investigative and prosecutorial authority in 
CT cases?  Is there a special examining magistrate with 
special powers in the CT area?  If intelligence is not 
permitted as evidence in a court of law, are parallel 
investigations based on open-source research conducted with 
the assistance of intelligence officials?  If there are legal 
restrictions in this area, are there work-arounds, and are 
they exploited? How long and under what conditions may 
authorities hold suspected terrorists/terrorist facilitators 
prior to/after being charged?  Pending and during trial?  Is 
all access to the suspected terrorist recorded by enforcement 
agencies?  Do they have access to telephones or e-mail?  Do 
they have weekend passes to leave jail?  Are foreign 
government service de-briefings permitted?  Are photographs, 
fingerprints, DNA samples collected by the detaining 
authority? 
 
-- The GODR does permit wiretaps with court approval.  It 
often lacks the equipment or manpower to use such law 
enforcement tools.  Law enforcement authorities may initiate 
surveillance and investigation of suspected 
terrorists/terrorist facilitators based on intelligence 
information and with a legally enforceable court order.  If 
evidence is collected in this manner, it can be used in 
court.  Primary investigative and prosecutorial authority in 
CT cases lies with the Attorney General,s office.  There is 
no special magistrate assigned to CT cases as there have been 
no CT cases to date in the Dominican Republic. 
 
-- Because there have been no CT investigations or 
prosecutions, it is uncertain what type of CT evidence the 
Dominican courts would accept.  Additionally, the Dominican 
Republic has recently enacted a new criminal procedural code 
that has yet to be tested thoroughly in the courts.  It is 
likely that the GODR would cooperate with USG CT requests to 
the best of its ability.  The GODR is hampered by a weak 
judicial system. 
 
F)  Host government efforts to investigate terrorist 
incidents or assist with international terrorism 
investigations, to reduce the ability of terrorists to cross 
national borders, including improving border control and 
reducing the availability of fraudulent documents. 
 
--  The GODR has not investigated terrorist incidents neither 
has it assisted with international terrorism investigations. 
Recent efforts to increase the professionalism of airport and 
port security officials have been met with guarded 
enthusiasm.  A new GODR administration has a strong migration 
and law enforcement cabinet level team. 
 
--  In May 2004, the GODR introduced a photodigitized, 
machine-readable passport which has good security features. 
It is being phased in gradually over the next several years. 
The older version passport is still being issued and, on 
occasion, sold by counterfeiters to non-Dominicans.  Embassy 
Santo Domingo has encouraged the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
to adopt a photodigitized machine-readable visa.  Lack of 
funding has been an obstacle in the past.  The new 
administration is once again exploring this possibility. 
Emboffs delivered a note verbale on the Lost/Stolen Data 
Share Program as instructed by Washington.  The director of 
the Dominican passport office responded positively and also 
sends lost/stolen passport reports to the consular anti-fraud 
unit. 
 
G) Not applicable 
 
H) Developments in host nation CT efforts, including any new 
organizations or processes created, including 
counterterrorism units and/or efforts to upgrade border or 
maritime security. 
 
-- The GODR changed administrations on August 16, 2004.  With 
that change came new leadership of the armed forces.  The 
current Secretary of the Armed Forces recently increased the 
number of troops on the Dominican/Haitian border.  It is 
unknown how long the increased level of military border 
security will stay in effect.  The main concern is lack of 
funding for the military to sustain the increased number of 
troops on the border.  Maritime security is under the 
leadership of the new Secretary of the Navy; it is one of 
most exploitable areas in the Dominican Republic. 
 
I) Not applicable 
 
J) Identify where host government has deployed military or 
paramilitary forces for combat, counter insurgency or CT 
activities. 
 
-- The GODR deployed military troops to Iraq from September 
2003 to May 2004.  The troops were trained in CT but did not 
see combat and counter insurgency.  The troops were exposed 
to indirect fire. 
 
K) Describe major changes, positive or negative, in the host 
government\'s stance towards terrorism, international or 
domestic.  What is responsible for the change? 
 
-- A new GODR administration took office in August.  The new 
law enforcement cabinet level officials of this 
administration are cooperating closely with the USG. 
 
L) Constraints on CT performance, including lack of 
capacity or political will. Describe popular attitudes 
toward terrorism and CT efforts, if germane. 
 
-- There is insufficient training of the military forces in 
the Dominican Republic and especially in CT efforts.  The 
general public and government attitude is one of support for 
CT measures; unfortunately, it is difficult to translate this 
attitude into action due to lack of funding and training.  An 
economic crisis in the Dominican Republic has made funding 
for military and police training, including CT training, a 
low government priority.  Additionally, there appears to be a 
continuing general feeling among Dominican society that, 
\"terrorism can\'t happen here.\"  This sentiment hinders 
training efforts and ensures that CT efforts do not rise in 
priority level. 
 
M)  Not applicable 
 
N)  Not applicable 
 
O)  Not applicable 
 
P)  Not applicable 
 
Q)  Not applicable 
 
R)  Not applicable 
KUBISKE 
"
"24723","12/29/2004 12:24","04SANTODOMINGO6880","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 006880 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, G/TIP FOR RACHEL OWEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICANS MAKE TIP ARRESTS; GET ALIEN SMUGGLING 
CONVICTION 
 
1. Dominican authorities continue to crack down on illegal 
smuggling and trafficking operations, particularly where 
there is evidence of child sexual exploitation.  In late 
December, the district attorney,s office in Santiago, the 
Dominican Republic,s second largest city, closed two bars 
known for child prostitution and rescued nine minors between 
the ages of 14 and 16.  According to Assistant Attorney 
General Frank Soto, authorities in Santiago acted on an 
anonymous tip about illicit activities at these bars. 
Authorities arrested four people in the raids, all of whom 
are being held in preventive detention on charges of 
violating the 2003 law against alien smuggling and 
trafficking in persons (Law 137-03).  The minors have 
reportedly been returned to their homes or placed in the care 
of the state. 
 
2. These arrests are the latest in a series of efforts in 
Santiago to crack down on child sexual exploitation.  In 
October, police closed down a pornography ring and rescued 
several children.  One suspect in that case is in detention, 
another is free on bail, and a third is still being sought. 
 
3. In addition, a judge in the southwestern town of Neyba 
sentenced an alien smuggler to three years in jail and a 
1,500 peso fine (about USD 52) under Law 137-03.  Reports 
indicate that the smuggler, Christian Dorius, smuggled at 
least three Haitians across the border, charging them USD 200 
each.  According to the Haitian migrants, Dorius said that he 
would take them to the capital, but instead took them to a 
remote location and robbed them.  The migrants were 
encouraged to go to the authorities by Father Pedro Ruquoy, a 
Catholic priest who works in a sugar plantation near Barahona 
and is well known for his advocacy for Haitian migrant 
workers.  The migrants have since been repatriated to Haiti. 
Hertell 
"
"24806","12/30/2004 18:45","04SANTODOMINGO6915","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","04SANTODOMINGO6841","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 006915 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/EPSC, EB/TPP/BTA, EF/IFD/OMA; STATE 
PASS AID/LAC; NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON; LABOR FOR ILAB; 
USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD; TREASURY FOR OASIA-LCARTER, 
RTOLOUI, DDOUGLASS 
STATE PASS USTR FOR VARGO, RYCKMAN, MALITO, CRONIN 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH; DHS FOR CIS-CARLOS ITURREGUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR, EFIN, PREL 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC TOWARD PARIS CLUB AND THE IMF 
STANDBY 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 6841 
 
1. (U) Dominican Technical Secretary Temistocles Montas 
called in Paris Club governments\' local representatives on 
December 29 and asked them to offer financing assurances for 
the Dominican Republic for 2005-2006 at the next Paris Club 
meeting, which is scheduled for the week of January 10. 
Montas said that at the last meeting on December 12, the 
Paris Club validated the Dominican strategy for handling its 
external arrears but had saved a decision about financing 
assurances for the January meeting.  The Dominicans are 
working toward completing all of the prior actions that are 
pre-requisites for a new IMF standby program, and identifying 
how the country\'s financing gap will be filled is one of 
them. 
 
2. (U) The timing is important to the Dominicans, Montas 
said.  The deadline for completing the prior actions is 
January 11 if the IMF Board is to consider the standby at its 
January 21 meeting.  In fact, Montas said the Government is 
trying to meet all of the prior actions by January 7.  The 
Dominicans want to be on the agenda for the January 21 IMF 
Board meeting because January 21 is the holiday for the 
protector of the country, Altagracia.  Launching the new 
standby on the day of the protector of the country holds 
great symbolism that President Fernandez would like to take 
advantage of. 
 
3. (U)  Montas said there were only three more prior actions 
to complete (other than Paris Club) and that all three are in 
process.  The first is passing the domestic budget.  The 
Senate has already acted, and passage in the Chamber of 
Deputies is expected either this week or next.  The second is 
issuing a decree to establish a committee to handle the 
electricity crisis.  The decree is drafted but President 
Fernandez decided to wait until January 3 or 4 to issue it. 
And the third is issuing a decree that eliminates certain 
illegal customs measures--administrative measures that DR 
Customs had no legal right to institute, such as Customs 
exceptions for books and medicines. 
 
4. (U) Montas added that by December 31, the Dominicans will 
have eliminated all its external debt service arrears to 
Paris Club creditors.  This had also been a prior action, but 
Montas categorized it as essentially completed.  The 
Government planned to do the same (eliminate arrears) on debt 
service owed to private banks in the first few days of the 
new year.  Among other, apparently completed prior actions 
that Montas mentioned were the following: 
-Starting operation of the Committee for Recovering Assets 
-Consulting with the bondholders and the four big banks that 
hold 85 percent of the debt on which service is due in 2005 
and 2006. The Government will meet with the banks in 
mid-January. 
-Establishing a mechanism to control/coordinate Dominican 
external borrowing. 
-Establishing a plan for recapitalizing the banks 
-Reviewing banks\' business plans 
 
5. (U) Montas acknowledged explicitly creditor governments\' 
distrust of the Dominican Government following the failures 
of the past two IMF standbys.  He said that the Fernandez 
government has sufficient will to fully comply with the 
standby it hopes will be approved January 21.  Montas 
observed that as soon as CAFTA is ratified, the Government 
will move forward on a fiscal reform project. 
 
6. (SBU) Note: We appreciate the Dapartment\'s offer to review 
arrears and inform the Embassy of any obligations to U.S. 
Government creditors that have not been cleared by December 
31 as Technical Secretary Montas indicated they would be.  We 
also understand from separate discussions with the Department 
that the U.S. will probably support giving the IMF financing 
assurances of one year as requested by Montas, and we request 
that the Department inform us before the January 10 Paris 
Club meeting if this changes. End note. 
Hertell 
"
"25286","1/12/2005 15:09","05SANTODOMINGO153","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","05SECSTATE274601","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 000153 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), G/TIP (PUCCETTI AND OWEN); 
SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KCRM, PHUM, DR 
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC TIP INTERIM ASSESSMENT DELIVERED 
 
REF: SECSTATE 274601 
 
1. On January 6, Charge and poloff delivered reftel text of 
the Dominican Republic\'s Interim TIP Assessment to Deputy 
Foreign Minister Alejandra Liriano and Luisa Vicioso, MFA 
Director for Women and Children\'s Issues.  Liriano thanked 
the charge for delivering the text personally and promised a 
thorough response after further consideration of the findings. 
 
2. Both Liriano and Vicioso expressed concern about the 
classification of Dominican anti-TIP efforts as \"inadequate,\" 
pointing to several areas of improvement since the Fernandez 
administration took power in August, including the formation 
of a dedicated anti-TIP unit in the Migration Directorate. 
They pledged to increase efforts, noting in particular the 
need to address the root causes of trafficking, including 
\"conditions of life\" that prompt potential TIP victims to put 
themselves at risk.  They also said the MFA will immediately 
encourage the authorities to reactivate stalled TIP cases and 
investigations and will continue the interagency effort to 
combine resources and share information. 
KUBISKE 
"
"25287","1/12/2005 15:09","05SANTODOMINGO154","Embassy Santo Domingo","UNCLASSIFIED","","This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.


 ","UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 000154 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV, KCRM, DR 
SUBJECT: FERNANDEZ INAUGURATES NEW DOMINICAN SUPREME COURT 
BUILDING; SPEAKS OUT ON CRIME 
 
 
1. SUMMARY.  On January 5, President Leonel Fernandez 
inaugurated the new building that will house the Supreme 
Court, Attorney General\'s office, and related activities. 
Fernandez used the occasion to speak out on the need for an 
honest and fair judiciary as an integral part of the fight 
against crime, drugs, and corruption.  He also defended the 
new Criminal Procedures Code, arguing that a recent rise in 
crime should be blamed on an increase on international 
narco-trafficking elements, rather than on the additional 
protections of Constitutional rights afforded by the code. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
2. On January 5, President Leonel Fernandez presided over the 
inauguration of the new $34 million, 30,000 square meter 
steel and glass building that will house the Supreme Court, 
the Attorney General\'s office, and other related activities. 
Construction began during Fernandez\'s first term (1996-2000), 
but stopped during the intervening Mejia administration. 
When Fernandez returned to power, he made it a priority to 
finish the project, which was completed less than five months 
into his tenure. 
 
3. All three speakers at the inauguration -- Fernandez, Chief 
Justice Jorge Subero Isa, and Attorney General Francisco 
Dominguez Brito -- paid tribute to the beauty of the new 
building, but stressed its function in the effort to reform 
and modernize the entire judicial system.  Fernandez, in 
particular, used the occasion to emphasize the urgent need 
for an independent, efficient, and fair judiciary in order to 
fight persistent problems of crime, drugs, and corruption. 
He made a plea to all judges in the nation to be impartial 
and independent, saying, \"I believe that this is still the 
path that we must travel.\"  He hoped that the new building 
would represent a new beginning in the reform of the justice 
system, allowing the Dominican Republic \"to form an adequate, 
institutional response to the problem of crime.\" 
 
4. Fernandez also made a strong and impassioned defense of 
the new Criminal Procedures Code (implemented in September), 
which has been criticized by some for being too lenient on 
criminals and the accused.  He referred to the code as \"no 
more than the first expression of the process of reform,\" and 
said that the recent rise in crime is not related to the 
additional protections of citizen rights provided by the 
Code, but rather is \"a direct result of transnational 
narco-trafficking, which is a perverse element of 
globalization.\"  Fernandez said that the new code was a large 
step forward in respect for human rights and guarantees of 
the individual liberties established in the Constitution. 
KUBISKE 
"